



      Manhattan Project: The Atomic Bombing of Nagasaki, August 9, 1945
    




















Events


People


Places


Processes


Science


Resources




Time Periods

1890s-1939:
                  Atomic Discoveries


1939-1942:
                  Early 
                  Government Support


1942:
                  Difficult 
                  Choices


1942-1944:
                  The Uranium 
                  Path to
                  the Bomb


1942-1944:
                  The Plutonium 
                  Path to
                  the Bomb


1942-1945:
                  Bringing It All Together


1945:
                  Dawn of the 
                  Atomic Era


1945-present:
                  Postscript -- 
                  The Nuclear Age










THE ATOMIC BOMBING OF NAGASAKI (Nagasaki, Japan, August 9, 1945)

Events
                            >
Dawn of the Atomic Era, 1945




The War Enters Its Final Phase, 1945


Debate Over How to Use the Bomb, Late Spring
                            1945


The Trinity Test, July 16, 1945


Safety and the Trinity Test, July 1945


Evaluations of Trinity, July 1945


Potsdam and the Final Decision to Bomb, July
                            1945


The Atomic Bombing of Hiroshima, August 6,
                            1945


The Atomic Bombing of Nagasaki, August 9,
                            1945


Japan Surrenders, August 10-15, 1945


The Manhattan Project and the Second World War,
                            1939-1945



                      The next break in the weather over Japan was due to appear
                      just three days after the
                      attack on Hiroshima, to be followed by at
                      least five more days of prohibitive weather.  The
                      plutonium implosion bomb, nicknamed
                      "Fat Man," was rushed into readiness to take
                      advantage of this window.  No further orders were
                      required for the attack. 
                      Truman's order of July 25th had
                      authorized the dropping of additional bombs as soon as
                      they were ready.  At 3:47 a.m. on August 9, 1945, a
                      B-29 named Bock's Car lifted off from Tinian and
                      headed toward the primary target: Kokura Arsenal, a
                      massive collection of war industries adjacent to the city
                      of Kokura.
                    

From this point on, few things went according to
                      plan.  The aircraft commander, Major Charles W.
                      Sweeney, ordered the arming of the bomb only ten minutes
                      after take-off so that the aircraft could be pressurized
                      and climb above the lightning and squalls that menaced the
                      flight all the way to Japan.  (A journalist, William
                      L. Laurence of the New York Times, on an
                      escorting aircraft saw some "St. Elmo's fire"
                      glowing on the edges of the aircraft and worried that the
                      static electricity might detonate the bomb.)  Sweeney
                      then discovered that due to a minor malfunction he would
                      not be able to access his reserve fuel.  The aircraft
                      next had to orbit over Yaku-shima off the south coast of
                      Japan for almost an hour in order to rendezvous with its
                      two escort B-29s, one of which never did arrive.  The
                      weather had been reported satisfactory earlier in the day
                      over Kokura Arsenal, but by the time the B-29 finally
                      arrived there, the target was obscured by smoke and
                      haze.  Two more passes over the target still produced
                      no sightings of the aiming point.  As an aircraft
                      crewman, Jacob Beser, later recalled, Japanese fighters
                      and bursts of antiaircraft fire were by this time starting
                      to make things "a little hairy."  Kokura no
                      longer appeared to be an option, and there was only enough
                      fuel on board to return to the secondary airfield on
                      Okinawa, making one hurried pass as they went over their
                      secondary target, the
                      city of Nagasaki.  As Beser later
                      put it, "there was no sense dragging the bomb home or
                      dropping it in the ocean."

As it turned out, cloud cover obscured Nagasaki as
                      well.  Sweeney reluctantly approved a much less
                      accurate radar approach on the target.  At the last
                      moment the bombardier, Captain Kermit K. Beahan, caught a
                      brief glimpse of the city's stadium through the clouds and
                      dropped the bomb.  At 11:02 a.m., at an altitude of
                      1,650 feet, Fat Man (right) exploded over
                      Nagasaki.  The yield of the
                      explosion was later estimated at 21 kilotons, 40 percent
                      greater than that of the
                      Hiroshima bomb.

Nagasaki was an industrial center and major port on the
                      western coast of Kyushu.  As had happened at
                      Hiroshima, the "all-clear" from an early morning
                      air raid alert had long been given by the time the B-29
                      had begun its bombing run.  A small conventional raid
                      on Nagasaki on August 1st had resulted in a partial
                      evacuation of the city, especially of school
                      children.  There were still almost 200,000 people in
                      the city below the bomb when it exploded.  The
                      hurriedly-targeted weapon ended up detonating almost
                      exactly between two of the principal targets in the city,
                      the Mitsubishi Steel and Arms Works to the south, and the
                      Mitsubishi-Urakami Torpedo Works (left) to the
                      north.  Had the bomb exploded farther south the
                      residential and commercial heart of the city would have
                      suffered much greater damage.
                    

In general, though Fat Man exploded with greater force
                      than Little Boy, the damage at Nagasaki was not as great
                      as it had been at Hiroshima.  The hills of Nagasaki,
                      its geographic layout, and the bomb's detonation over an
                      industrial area all helped shield portions of the city
                      from the weapon's blast,
                      heat, and
                      radiation effects.  The explosion
                      affected a total area of approximately 43 square
                      miles.  About 8.5 of those square miles were water,
                      and 33 more square miles were only partially
                      settled.  Many roads and rail lines escaped major
                      damage.  In some areas electricity was not knocked
                      out, and fire breaks created over the last several months
                      helped to prevent the spread of fires to the
                      south.

Although the destruction at Nagasaki has generally
                      received less worldwide attention than that at Hiroshima,
                      it was extensive nonetheless.  Almost everything up
                      to half a mile from ground zero was completely destroyed,
                      including even the earthquake-hardened concrete structures
                      that had sometimes survived at comparable distances at
                      Hiroshima.  According to a Nagasaki Prefectural
                      report "men and animals died almost instantly"
                      within 1 kilometer (0.62 miles) of the point of
                      detonation.  Almost all homes within a mile and a
                      half were destroyed, and dry, combustible materials such
                      as paper instantly burst into flames as far away as 10,000
                      feet from ground zero.  Of the 52,000 homes in
                      Nagasaki, 14,000 were destroyed and 5,400 more seriously
                      damaged.  Only 12 percent of the homes escaped
                      unscathed.  The official Manhattan Engineer District
                      report on the attack termed the damage to the two
                      Mitsubishi plants "spectacular."  Despite
                      the absence of a firestorm, numerous secondary fires
                      erupted throughout the city.  Fire-fighting efforts
                      were hampered by water line breaks, and six weeks later
                      the city was still suffering from a shortage of
                      water.  A U.S. Navy officer who visited the city in
                      mid-September reported that, even over a month after the
                      attack, "a smell of death and corruption pervades the
                      place."  As at Hiroshima, the psychological
                      effects of the attack were undoubtedly
                      considerable.

As with the estimates of deaths at Hiroshima, it will
                      never be known for certain how many people died as a
                      result of the atomic attack on Nagasaki.  The best
                      estimate is 40,000 people died initially, with 60,000 more
                      injured.  By January 1946, the number of deaths
                      probably approached 70,000, with perhaps ultimately twice
                      that number dead total within five years.  For those
                      areas of Nagasaki affected by the explosion, the death
                      rate was comparable to that at Hiroshima.
                    

                      The day after the attack on Nagasaki, the emperor of Japan
                      overruled the military leaders of Japan and forced them to
                      offer to
                      surrender (almost) unconditionally.
                    


The War Enters Its Final Phase, 1945


Debate Over How to Use the Bomb, Late Spring
                            1945


The Trinity Test, July 16, 1945


Safety and the Trinity Test, July 1945


Evaluations of Trinity, July 1945


Potsdam and the Final Decision to Bomb, July
                            1945


The Atomic Bombing of Hiroshima, August 6,
                            1945


The Atomic Bombing of Nagasaki, August 9,
                            1945


Japan Surrenders, August 10-15, 1945


The Manhattan Project and the Second World War,
                            1939-1945



Previous    Next



Sources and notes for this page.


Portions of the text for this page were adapted from,
                        and portions were taken directly from the
                        Office of History and Heritage Resources
                        publication:
                        F. G. Gosling,
                          The Manhattan Project: Making the Atomic Bomb
                          (DOE/MA-0001; Washington: History Division, Department
                          of Energy, January 1999), 53-54.  Also used was the report on "The
                        Atomic Bombings of
                        Hiroshima
                        and Nagasaki" in the official
                        Manhattan District History, produced by the War
                        Department in 1947 at the direction of
                        Leslie Groves, especially pages 1-19;
                        the "Atomic Bombings" document is available in
                        the University Publications of America (UPA) microfilm
                        collection,
                        Manhattan Project: Official History and Documents
                        (Washington: 1977), reel #1/12; the report itself is a
                        government document.  For an account of the
                        mission, see the "Eye Witness Account: Atomic Bomb
                        Mission Over Nagasaki" press release, written by
                        William L. Laurence of the New York Times and
                        released on September 9, 1945; this is also available on
                        reel #1/12 of the UPA
                        Manhattan Project microfilm collection. 
                        Summaries of Hiroshima and Nagasaki casualty rates and
                        damage estimates appear in Leslie R. Groves,
                        Now It Can Be Told (New York: Harper & Row,
                        1962), 319, 329-330, 346, and Vincent C. Jones,
                        Manhattan: The Army and the Atomic Bomb, United
                        States Army in World War II (Washington: Center of
                        Military History, United States Army, 1988),
                        545-548.  For a description of Kokura Arsenal and
                        interesting reflections on its postwar fate, see
                        "Chapter 4: Kokura" of Paul Saffo's essay
                        "The Road from Trinity: Reflections on the Atom
                        Bomb"; this is available on Paul Saffo's web site
                        at
                        http://www.saffo.com/essays/the-road-from-trinity-reflections-on-the-atom-bomb/.  The map showing the flight paths for the
                        Hiroshima and Nagasaki missions is reproduced from
                        Gosling, Making the Atomic Bomb, 52.  The
                        photographs of Fat Man and of the general devastation at
                        Nagasaki are courtesy the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
                        (via the
                        National Archives (NARA)).  The photograph of the destruction at the
                        Mitsubishi facility north of ground zero is courtesy the
                        Los Alamos National Laboratory; the photograph was taken by Robert Serber and is
                        reprinted in Rachel Fermi and Esther Samra,
                        Picturing the Bomb: Photographs from the Secret World
                          of the Manhattan Project (New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., Publishers, 1995),
                        190.  The photograph of the mother and child is
                        courtesy the
                        Department of Energy
                        (via NARA).  The photograph of the bodies in the
                        trench is reprinted from Vincent C. Jones,
                        Manhattan: The Army and the Atomic Bomb, United
                        States Army in World War II (Washington: Center of
                        Military History, United States Army, 1988), 548.



Home |
                          History Office
                          
                          |
                          OpenNet
                          |
                          DOE
                          
                          |
                          Privacy and Security Notices
About this Site
                          |
                          
                            How to Navigate this Site
                          |
                          Note on Sources
                          |
                           Site Map |
                          Contact Us











