



      Manhattan Project: The Atomic Bombing of Hiroshima, August 6, 1945
    




















Events


People


Places


Processes


Science


Resources




Time Periods

1890s-1939:
                  Atomic Discoveries


1939-1942:
                  Early 
                  Government Support


1942:
                  Difficult 
                  Choices


1942-1944:
                  The Uranium 
                  Path to
                  the Bomb


1942-1944:
                  The Plutonium 
                  Path to
                  the Bomb


1942-1945:
                  Bringing It All Together


1945:
                  Dawn of the 
                  Atomic Era


1945-present:
                  Postscript -- 
                  The Nuclear Age









THE ATOMIC BOMBING OF HIROSHIMA (Hiroshima, Japan, August 6, 1945)

Events
                            >
Dawn of the Atomic Era, 1945




The War Enters Its Final Phase, 1945


Debate Over How to Use the Bomb, Late Spring
                            1945


The Trinity Test, July 16, 1945


Safety and the Trinity Test, July 1945


Evaluations of Trinity, July 1945


Potsdam and the Final Decision to Bomb, July
                            1945


The Atomic Bombing of Hiroshima, August 6,
                            1945


The Atomic Bombing of Nagasaki, August 9,
                            1945


Japan Surrenders, August 10-15, 1945


The Manhattan Project and the Second World War,
                            1939-1945



                      In the early morning hours of August 6, 1945, a B-29
                      bomber named Enola Gay took off from the island
                      of Tinian and headed north by northwest toward
                      Japan.  The bomber's primary target was the
                      city of Hiroshima, located on the deltas
                      of southwestern Honshu Island facing the Inland Sea. 
                      Hiroshima had a civilian population of almost 300,000 and
                      was an important military center, containing about 43,000
                      soldiers.
                    

The bomber, piloted by the commander of the 509th
                      Composite Group, Colonel Paul Tibbets, flew at low
                      altitude on automatic pilot before climbing to 31,000 feet
                      as it neared the target area.  At approximately 8:15
                      a.m. Hiroshima time the Enola Gay released
                      "Little Boy," its 9,700-pound
                      uranium gun-type bomb, over the
                      city.  Tibbets immediately dove away to avoid the
                      anticipated shock wave.  Forty-three seconds later, a
                      huge explosion lit the morning sky as
                      Little Boy detonated 1,900 feet above the city, directly
                      over a parade field where soldiers of the Japanese Second
                      Army were doing calisthenics.  Though already eleven
                      and a half miles away, the Enola Gay was rocked
                      by the blast.  At first, Tibbets thought he was
                      taking flak.  After a second
                      shock wave (reflected from the ground) hit the plane, the
                      crew looked back at Hiroshima.  "The city was
                      hidden by that awful cloud . . . boiling up, mushrooming,
                      terrible and incredibly tall," Tibbets
                      recalled.  The yield of the
                      explosion was later estimated at 15 kilotons (the
                      equivalent of 15,000 tons of TNT).
                    

                      On the ground moments before the blast it was a calm and
                      sunny Monday morning.  An air raid alert from earlier
                      that morning had been called off after only a solitary
                      aircraft was seen (the weather plane), and by 8:15 the
                      city was alive with activity -- soldiers doing their
                      morning calisthenics, commuters on foot or on bicycles,
                      groups of women and children working
                      outside to clear firebreaks.  Those closest to the
                      explosion died instantly, their bodies turned to black
                      char.  Nearby birds burst into flames in mid-air, and
                      dry, combustible materials such as paper instantly ignited
                      as far away as 6,400 feet from ground zero.  The
                      white light acted as a giant flashbulb, burning the dark
                      patterns of clothing onto skin (right) and the shadows of
                      bodies onto walls.  Survivors outdoors close to the
                      blast generally describe a literally blinding light
                      combined with a sudden and overwhelming wave of
                      heat. (The effects of
                      radiation are usually not immediately
                      apparent.)  The blast wave followed
                      almost instantly for those close-in, often knocking them
                      from their feet.  Those that were indoors were
                      usually spared the flash burns, but flying glass from
                      broken windows filled most rooms, and all but the very
                      strongest structures collapsed.  One boy was blown
                      through the windows of his house and across the street as
                      the house collapsed behind him.  Within minutes 9 out
                      of 10 people half a mile or less from ground zero were
                      dead.
                    

People farther from the point of detonation experienced
                      first the flash and heat, followed seconds later by a
                      deafening boom and the blast wave.  Nearly every
                      structure within one mile of ground zero was destroyed,
                      and almost every building within three miles was
                      damaged.  Less than 10 percent of the buildings in
                      the city survived without any damage, and the blast wave
                      shattered glass in suburbs twelve miles
                      away.  The most common first
                      reaction of those that were indoors even miles from ground
                      zero was that their building had just suffered a direct
                      hit by a bomb.  Small ad hoc rescue parties soon
                      began to operate, but roughly half of the city's
                      population was dead or injured.  In those areas most
                      seriously affected virtually no one escaped serious
                      injury.  The numerous small fires that erupted
                      simultaneously all around the city soon merged into one
                      large firestorm, creating extremely strong winds that blew
                      towards the center of the fire.  The firestorm
                      eventually engulfed 4.4 square miles of the city, killing
                      anyone who had not escaped in the first minutes after the
                      attack.  One postwar study of the victims of
                      Hiroshima found that less than 4.5 percent of survivors
                      suffered leg fractures.  Such injuries were not
                      uncommon; it was just that most who could not walk were
                      engulfed by the firestorm.
                    

Even after the flames had subsided, relief from the
                      outside was slow in coming.  For hours after the
                      attack the Japanese government did not even know for sure
                      what had happened.  Radio and telegraph
                      communications with Hiroshima had suddenly ended at 8:16
                      a.m., and vague reports of some sort of large explosion
                      had begun to filter in, but the Japanese high command knew
                      that no large-scale air raid had taken place over the city
                      and that there were no large stores of explosives
                      there.  Eventually a Japanese staff officer was
                      dispatched by plane to survey the city from overhead, and
                      while he was still nearly 100 miles away from the city he
                      began to report on a huge cloud of smoke that hung over
                      it.  The first confirmation of exactly what had
                      happened came only sixteen hours later with the
                      announcement of the bombing by the
                      United States.  Relief workers from outside the city
                      eventually began to arrive and the situation stabilized
                      somewhat.  Power in undamaged areas of the city was
                      even restored on August 7th, with limited rail service
                      resuming the following day.  Several days after the
                      blast, however, medical staff began to recognize the first
                      symptoms of radiation sickness among the
                      survivors.  Soon the death rate actually began to
                      climb again as patients who had appeared to be recovering
                      began suffering from this strange new
                      illness.  Deaths from radiation sickness did not
                      peak until three to four weeks after the attacks and did
                      not taper off until seven to eight weeks after the
                      attack.  Long-range health dangers associated with
                      radiation exposure, such as an increased danger of cancer,
                      would linger for the rest of the victims' lives, as would
                      the psychological effects of the attack.
                    

No one will ever know for certain how many died as a
                      result of the attack on Hiroshima.  Some 70,000
                      people probably died as a result of initial blast, heat,
                      and radiation effects.  This included about twenty
                      American airmen being held as prisoners in the city. 
                      By the end of 1945, because of the lingering effects of
                      radioactive fallout and other after
                      effects, the Hiroshima death toll was probably over
                      100,000.  The five-year death total may have reached
                      or even exceeded 200,000, as cancer and other long-term
                      effects took hold.
                    

                      At 11:00 a.m., August 6 (Washington D.C. time), radio
                      stations began playing a prepared statement from
                      President Truman informing the American
                      public that the United States had dropped an entirely new
                      type of bomb on the Japanese city of Hiroshima --
                      an "atomic bomb." Truman warned that if
                      Japan still refused to surrender unconditionally, as
                      demanded by the Potsdam Declaration of
                      July 26, the United States would attack additional targets
                      with equally devastating results.  Two days later, on
                      August 8, the Soviet Union declared war on Japan and
                      attacked Japanese forces in Manchuria, ending American
                      hopes that the war would end before Russian entry into the
                      Pacific
                      theater.  By August 9th, American aircraft were
                      showering leaflets all over Japan informing its people
                      that "We are in possession of the most destructive
                      explosive ever devised by man.  A single one of our
                      newly developed atomic bombs is actually the equivalent in
                      explosive power to what 2,000 of our giant B-29s can carry
                      on a single mission.  This awful fact is one for you
                      to ponder and we solemnly assure you it is grimly
                      accurate.  We have just begun to use this weapon
                      against your homeland.  If you still have any doubt,
                      make inquiry as to what happened to Hiroshima when just
                      one atomic bomb fell on that city."  Meanwhile,
                      Tibbets's bomber group was simply waiting for the weather
                      to clear in order to drop its next bomb, the
                      plutonium implosion weapon nicknamed
                      "Fat Man" (left) that was destined for the city
                      of Nagasaki.
                    


The War Enters Its Final Phase, 1945


Debate Over How to Use the Bomb, Late Spring
                            1945


The Trinity Test, July 16, 1945


Safety and the Trinity Test, July 1945


Evaluations of Trinity, July 1945


Potsdam and the Final Decision to Bomb, July
                            1945


The Atomic Bombing of Hiroshima, August 6,
                            1945


The Atomic Bombing of Nagasaki, August 9,
                            1945


Japan Surrenders, August 10-15, 1945


The Manhattan Project and the Second World War,
                            1939-1945



Previous    Next



Sources and notes for this page.


Portions of the text for this page were adapted from,
                        and portions were taken directly from the
                        Office of History and Heritage Resources
                        publication:
                        F. G. Gosling,
                          The Manhattan Project: Making the Atomic Bomb
                          (DOE/MA-0001; Washington: History Division, Department
                          of Energy, January 1999), 51-53.  Also used was the report on "The
                        Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and
                        Nagasaki" in the official
                        Manhattan District History, produced by the War
                        Department in 1947 at the direction of
                        Leslie Groves, especially pages 1-19;
                        the "Atomic Bombings" document is available in
                        the University Publications of America microfilm
                        collection,
                        Manhattan Project: Official History and Documents
                        (Washington: 1977), reel #1/12; the report itself is a
                        government document.  Tibbets's description is from
                        Paul W. Tibbets, "How to Drop an Atom Bomb,"
                        Saturday Evening Post 218 (June 8, 1946),
                        136.  The estimate of Little Boy's yield is from
                        United States Nuclear Tests, July 1945
                          through September 1992 (DOE/NV-209-REV 15; Las Vegas,
                          NV: Nevada Operations Office, Department of Energy,
                          December 2000), vii.  Summaries of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
                        casualty rates and damage estimates appear in Leslie R.
                        Groves, Now It Can Be Told (New York: Harper
                        & Row, 1962), 319, 329-330, 346, and Vincent C.
                        Jones, Manhattan: The Army and the Atomic Bomb,
                        United States Army in World War II (Washington: Center
                        of Military History, United States Army, 1988),
                        545-548.  A translation of the leaflets dropped on
                        Japan in between Hiroshima and Nagasaki can be found in
                        Dennis Merrill, ed.,
                        Documentary History of the Truman Volume 1,
                        The Decision to Drop the Atomic Bomb on Japan
                        (Bethesda, MD: University Publications of America,
                        1995), 194-195.  The photograph of the mushroom
                        cloud is courtesy the
                        United States Air Force (USAF)
                        (via the
                        National Archives
                        (NARA)).  The photographs of Little Boy and Fat Man
                        are courtesy the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (via
                        NARA).  The photograph of the Enola Gay landing at
                        Tinian Island is courtesy the USAF.  The photograph
                        of the woman with burns on her back is courtesy the U.S.
                        Army Corps of Engineers (via NARA).  The
                        photographs of the mushroom cloud taken from the ground
                        and of the debris (including the Hiroshima Peace
                        Memorial (Genbaku
                        "A-bomb" Dome) are courtesy the
                        Federation of American Scientists.  The photographs of the hospital and of the lone
                        soldier walking through an almost-completely leveled
                        portion of the city are courtesy the Department of the
                        Navy (via NARA); the former was taken by Wayne
                        Miller.



Home |
                          History Office
                          
                          |
                          OpenNet
                          |
                          DOE
                          
                          |
                          Privacy and Security Notices
About this Site
                          |
                          
                            How to Navigate this Site
                          |
                          Note on Sources
                          |
                           Site Map |
                          Contact Us











