










Personal life | Richard Feynman	





























































































  




Skip to primary content


Richard Feynman
An unordinary scientist





Search




Main menu

HomeBiography
The Manhattan Project
Early career
The Caltech years
Feynman’s later years
Personal life
Some Books About Feynman








Personal life


Feynman’s first wife died while he was working on the Manhattan project. He married a second time, to Mary Louise Bell of Neodesha, Kansas in June 1952; this marriage was brief and unsuccessful.
Feynman later married Gweneth Howarth from the United Kingdom, who shared his enthusiasm for life. Besides their home in Altadena, California, they had a beach house in Baja California. They had a son, Carl in 1962, and adopted a daughter, Michelle, in 1968.
According to Professor Steven Frautschi, a colleague of Feynman, Feynman was the only person in the Altadena region to buy flood insurance after the massive 1978 fire, predicting correctly that the fire’s destruction would lead to land erosion, causing mudslides and flooding. The flood occurred in 1979 after winter rains and destroyed multiple houses in the neighborhood.
Feynman did not work only on physics, and had a large circle of friends from all walks of life, including the arts. He took up painting at one time and enjoyed some success under the pseudonym “Ofey.” He learned to play drums (frigideira) in acceptable samba style in Brazil by persistence and practice, and participated in a samba “school.” Such actions earned him a reputation of eccentricity.
Feynman had very liberal views on sexuality and was not ashamed of admitting it. In Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!, he gives advice on the best way to pick up a girl in a hostess bar and drew a decoration for a massage parlor. His favorite place was nude/topless bars, which he used to visit six times a week. In addition, he admitted to being a cannabis user as well as having experimented with LSD and Ketamine. Feynman also enjoyed bike riding and being interviewed.


 
Share this:TwitterFacebookLike Loading... 





Leave a comment Cancel reply



Δ 






Blog at WordPress.com.










 


 




Subscribe



Subscribed







				Richard Feynman			










 

												Sign me up											




											Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 







 Privacy						



 





				Richard Feynman			



 Customize





Subscribe



Subscribed


Sign up
Log in
Copy shortlink


											Report this content										



											View post in Reader										


Manage subscriptions

Collapse this bar














 


%d 


 





