


Von Neumann and the Development of Game Theory








Emile
Borel: The Forgotten Father of Game Theory? 

In 1921, Emile Borel, a French mathematician, published several papers on
the theory of games. He used poker as an example and addressed the problem
of bluffing and second-guessing the opponent in a game of imperfect
information. Borel envisioned game theory as being used in economic and
military applications.
Borel's ultimate goal was to determine whether a "best" strategy for a
given game exists and to find that strategy. While Borel could be arguably
called as the first mathematician to envision an organized system for
playing games, he did not develop his ideas very far. For that reason,
most historians give the credit for developing and popularizing game
theory to John Von Neumann, who published his first paper on game theory
in 1928, seven years after Borel.




John Von Neumann




Born in Budapest, Hungary, in 1903, Von Neumann distinguished himself from
his peers in childhood for having a photographic memory, being able to
memorize and recite back a page out of a phone book in a few minutes.
Science, history, and psychology were among his many interests; he
succeeded in every academic subject in school.


He published his first mathematical paper in collaboration with his tutor
at the age of eighteen, and resolved to study mathematics in college. He
enrolled in the University of Budapest in 1921, and over the next few
years attended the University of Berlin and the Swiss Federal Institute
of Technology in Zurich as well. By 1926, he received his Ph.D. in
mathematics with minors in physics and chemistry.


By his mid-twenties, von Neumann was known as a young mathematical genius  
and his fame had spread worldwide in the academic community. In 1929, he
was offered a job at Princeton. Upon marrying his fiancee, Mariette,
Neumann moved to the U.S. (Agnostic most of his life, Von Neumann accepted
his wife's Catholic faith for the marriage, though not taking it very
seriously.)


In 1935, Mariette gave birth to Von Neumann's daughter, Marina. Two years
later, Mariette left Von Neumann for J. B. Kuper, a physicist. Within a
year of his divorce, Von Neumann began an affair with Klara Dan,
his childhood sweetheart, who was willing to leave her husband for him.


Von Neumann is commonly described as a practical joker and always the life
of the party. John and Klara held a party every week or so, creating a
kind of salon at their house. Von Neumann used his phenomenal memory to
compile an immense library of jokes which he used to liven up a
conversation. Von Neumann loved games and toys, which probably contributed
in great part to his work in Game Theory.


An occasional heavy drinker, Von Neumann was an aggressive and reckless
driver, supposedly totaling a car every year or so. According to William
Poundstone's Prisoner's Dilemma, "an intersection in Princeton was
nicknamed "Von Neumann Corner" for all the auto accidents he had there."
(p.25)


His colleagues found it "disconcerting" that upon entering an office where
a pretty secretary worked, von Neumann habitually would "bend way way
over, more or less trying to look up her dress."  (Steve J. Heims, John
Von Neumann and Norbert Wiener: From Mathematics to the Technologies of
Life and Death, 1980, quoted in Prisoner's Dilemma, p.26) Some
secretaries 
were so bothered by Von Neumann that they put cardboard partitions at the
front of their desks to block his view.


Despite his personality quirks, no one could dispute that Von Neumann was
brilliant. Beginning in 1927, Von Neumann applied new mathematical methods
to quantum theory. His work was instrumental in subsequent "philosophical"
interpretations of the theory.



For Von Neumann, the inspiration for game theory was poker, a game he
played occasionally and not terribly well. Von Neumann realized that poker
was not guided by probability theory alone, as an unfortunate player who
would use only probability theory would find out. Von Neumann wanted to
formalize the idea of "bluffing," a strategy that is meant to deceive the
other players and hide information from them.


In his 1928 article, "Theory of Parlor Games," Von Neumann first
approached the discussion of game theory, and proved the famous Minimax
theorem. From the outset, Von Neumann knew that game theory would prove
invaluable to economists. He teamed up with Oskar Morgenstern, an Austrian
economist at Princeton, to develop his theory.


Their book, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, revolutionized
the field of economics. Although the work itself was intended solely for
economists, its applications to psychology, sociology, politics, warfare,
recreational games, and many other fields soon became apparent.


Although Von Neumann appreciated Game Theory's applications to
economics, he was most interested in applying his methods to politics and
warfare, perhaps stemming from his favorite childhood game, Kriegspiel, a
chess-like military simulation. He used his methods to model the Cold War
interaction between the U.S. and the USSR, viewing them as two players in
a zero-sum game.


From the very beginning of World War II, Von Neumann was confident of the
Allies' victory.  He sketched out a mathematical model of the conflict
from which he deduced that the Allies would win, applying some of the
methods of game theory to his predictions.


In 1943, Von Neumann was invited to work on the Manhattan Project. Von
Neumann did crucial calculations on the implosion design of the atomic
bomb, allowing for a more efficient, and more deadly, weapon. Von
Neumann's mathematical models were also used to plan out the path the
bombers carrying the bombs would take to minimize their chances of being
shot down. The mathematician helped select the location in Japan to bomb.
Among the potential targets he examined was Kyoto, Yokohama, and Kokura.


"Of all of Von Neumann's postwar work, his development of the digital
computer looms the largest today." (Poundstone 76) After examining the
Army's ENIAC during the war, Von Neumann came up with ideas for a better
computer, using his mathematical abilities to improve the computer's logic
design. Once the war had ended, the U.S. Navy and other sources provided
funds for Von Neumann's machine, which he claimed would be able to
accurately predict weather patterns.


Capable of 2,000 operations a second, the computer did not
predict weather very well, but became quite useful doing a set of
calculations necessary for the design of the hydrogen bomb. Von Neumann 
is also credited with coming up with the idea of basing computer
calculations on binary numbers, having programs stored in computer's
memory in coded form as opposed to punchcards, and several other
crucial developments. Von Neumann's wife, Klara, became one of the first
computer programmers.


Von Neumann later helped design the SAGE computer system designed to
detect a Soviet nuclear attack


In 1948, Von Neumann became a consultant for the 
RAND Corporation.  RAND
(Research ANd Development) was founded by defense contractors and the
Air Force as a "think tank" to "think about the unthinkable." Their main
focus was exploring the possibilities of nuclear war and the possible
strategies for such a possibility.


Von Neumann was, at the time, a strong supporter of "preventive war."
Confident even during World War II that the Russian spy network had
obtained many of the details of
the atom bomb design, Von Neumann knew that it was only a matter of time
before the Soviet Union became a nuclear power. He predicted that were
Russia allowed to build a nuclear arsenal, a war against the U.S. would be
inevitable. He therefore recommended that the U.S. launch a nuclear strike
at Moscow, destroying its enemy and becoming a dominant world power, so as
to avoid a more destructive nuclear war later on. "With the Russians it is
not a question of whether but of when," he would say. An oft-quoted remark
of his is, "If you say why not bomb them tomorrow, I say why not today? If
you say today at 5 o'clock, I say why not one o'clock?"


Just a few years after "preventive war" was first advocated, it became an
impossibility. By 1953, the Soviets had 300-400 warheads, meaning that any
nuclear strike would be effectively retaliated.


In 1954, Von Neumann was appointed to the Atomic Energy Commission. A year
later, he was diagnosed with bone cancer. William Poundstone's
Prisoner's 
Dilemma suggests that the disease resulted from the radiation Von
Neumann 
received as a witness to the atomic tests on Bikini atoll. "A number of
physicists associated with the bomb succumbed to cancer at relatively
early ages." (p. 189)



Von Neumann maintained a busy schedule throughout his sickness, even when
he became confined to a wheelchair. It has been claimed by some that the
wheelchair-bound mathematician was the inspiration for the character of
Dr. Strangelove in the 1963 film Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop
Worrying and Love the Bomb.


Von Neumann's last public appearance was in February 1956, when President
Eisenhower presented him with the Medal of Freedom at the White House. In
April, Von Neumann checked into Walter Reed Hospital. He set up office in
his room, and constantly received visitors from the Air Force and the
Secretary of Defense office, still performing his duties as a consultant
to many top political figures.


John von Neumann died February 8, 1957.


His wife, Klara von Neumann, committed suicide six years later.


Dr. Marina von Neumann Whitman, John's daughter from his first marriage,
was invited by President Nixon to become the first woman to serve on the
council of economic advisers.








