









12 famous mathematicians and their discoveries - InquiBox

























































































Home
Subscribe
Gift

Gift Voucher
Gift Subscription
Gift Boxes


Blog
Login 


0







Login


0


 








×







 
12 famous mathematicians and their discoveries



Mathematics is a field that some people shy away from, but there are some famous mathematicians who had a passion for numbers throughout our history books. They looked for ways to understand the world as it relates to mathematics and their contributions have been very important for their generation and beyond. We compiled a list of famous mathematicians and their discoveries over the years.


Brahmagupta (598-668 CE) 
Image source
Brahmagupta’s work comprised of the rules to compute with zero. It was traditionally used as a place holder. He also wrote some important works on astronomy alongside mathematics. The seventh-century Indian mathematician showcased examples such as how to find the cube and cube-root of an integer and gave rules regarding squares and square roots. Read more.
Isaac Newton (1643- 1727)
Image source
Isaac Newton is perhaps most well-known for his legend on developing the universal laws of gravity. It is known that a young Isaac Newton was sitting under an apple tree when he was struck on the head by a fruit. This lead to his crucible moment, to develop some of the most important principles of modern physics. He is also renowned for his discovery of calculus, and binomial theorem. This in large has been used to work out the probability of things through statistics. Read more.
Diophantus (AD 285 and 299)
Image source
Diophantus is sometimes called “the father of algebra” and developed theories on numbers and solving equations. ‘Arithmetica’ is a major work of Diophantus, and inspired some of the world’s greatest mathematicians including Leonhard Euler and Pierre de Fermat to make significant new discoveries. Read more.
Ada Lovelace (1815-1852)
Image source
English mathematician, Ada Lovelace is recognised as the world’s first computer programmer. Her mathematical skills were evident at an early age. She introduced many computer concepts. Read more.
Blaise Pascal (1623 – 1662)
Image source
Blaise Pascal, a French philosopher, mathematician, and physicist. He contributed to several areas of mathematics, but he is widely known for Pascal’s triangle. Its common use is in probability, where it can be used to find combinations. Read more.
Aryabhata (476–550 CE)
Image source
Indian mathematician Aryabhata has had an immense influence on mathematics and astronomy. His contribution includes his work on providing an approximate value. He insisted that the earth is rotating on an axis around the sun and the moon rotated around it. He also spoke about the position of nine planets and stated that they revolved around the sun. Read more.
Fibonacci (1170-1240)
Image source
Fibonacci is famous for contributions to number theory and is one of the greatest European Italian scholars. He was the first to introduce the Hindu – Arabic system in Europe, i.e., the positional system of using ten digits with a decimal point and zero. He is popular for using the Fibonacci number sequence, i.e., 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13; in the book authored by him, known as Book of Calculation, the Liber Abaci. Read more.
Euler (1707-1723)
Image source
Euler is a Swiss physicist and an expert in maths. Euler discovered the number e and calculated its value to 23 decimal places. This irrational number is one of the most important numbers and is called Euler’s number. Read more.
Arthur Cayley (1821 – 1895)
Image source
Arthur Cayley is a British mathematician. He made fundamental contributions to algebraic geometry. Cayley and Salmon (a mathematician) discovered the 27 lines on a cubic surface. Furthermore, he also developed the algebraic aspect of matrices in two papers in the 1850s. Besides their many other applications, matrices became extremely useful for quantum mechanics. Read more.
Emmy Noether (1882-1935)
Image source
Emmy Noether is a German mathematician and her work on abstract algebra makes her one of the most important mathematicians of her time. Did you know Einstein called her a genius? Read more.
George Boole (1815 – 1864)
Image source
George Boole was an English mathematician. He developed  a mathematical representation for the “laws of thought.” This led to using symbols such as x to stand for concepts. He helped establish modern symbolic logic which has now helped with the design of digital computer circuits. Read more.




Did you like our selection of these 11 famous mathematicians and their discoveries? Comment down below some of your favourite mathematicians?
We are exploring the theme of “around the world in numbers” this month at InquiBox. Sign up now and get your first box at $19 using the code “WINTER”. Sign up here

Extra reading: check out our posts on 10 fascinating science-images and our blog on 11 Interesting videos about space. 



 

 

Popular Posts 





12 famous mathematicians and their discoveries

						Mathematics is a field that some people shy away from, but there are some famous mathematicians who had a passion…					








11 Optical illusions for kids

						Optical Illusions for kids play with the way an object appears, through the use of colour, light, images and patterns to manipulate what our brains are perceiving. why…					








10 cool science discoveries of the 21st century

						We have compiled a list of  10 cool science discoveries of the 21st century which are fascinating and at the…					








5 wild chemistry science experiments that will blow your mind

						Science can be loads of fun. From creating a foamy elephant toothpaste to making a bouncy ball. Check out these…					








10 interesting insects and bugs found around Australia

						Australia is infamous for being home to some of the deadliest creatures on the planet. Check out these 10 interesting insects…					


 












 Copyright © 2019 InquiBox Pty. Ltd. All Rights Reserved

Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy


 

Front Page
Get InquiBox
 

FAQs
Blog
 

 








 Receive our latest deals, fun facts, activities and more.

 





















 





Made with ❤️ in Melbourne




 




















