






9 Famous Female Mathematicians Who Have Changed The World






































































Maths Tutoring for Schools

National Tutoring Programme
Primary Programmes
Secondary Programmes
Multi-Academy Trusts


How it Works

Impact
Case Studies
Our Tutors


Resources

Primary Maths Resources (Free)
Primary Maths Resources (Premium)
Secondary Maths Resources (Free)
– GCSE Maths Revision Guides (Free)
– GCSE Maths Papers (Free)
– GCSE Maths Revision Resources (Free)
Senior Leader Zone (Free)


Pricing

Maths Tutoring Pricing
Premium Maths Resources Subscriptions


Blog
Request a quote
Log in
 












Maths Tutoring for Schools

National Tutoring Programme
Primary Programmes
Secondary Programmes
Multi-Academy Trusts


How it Works

Impact
Case Studies
Our Tutors


Resources

Primary Maths Resources (Free)
Primary Maths Resources (Premium)
Secondary Maths Resources (Free)
– GCSE Maths Revision Guides (Free)
– GCSE Maths Papers (Free)
– GCSE Maths Revision Resources (Free)
Senior Leader Zone (Free)


Pricing

Maths Tutoring Pricing
Premium Maths Resources Subscriptions


Blog
Request a quote
Log in
 














Interventions

School Interventions
Tutoring


SLT and Maths Leads

Leadership
Ofsted
Maths Mastery
Teaching and Learning


Primary Maths

Four Operations
Place Value & Number
Fractions, Decimals & Percentages
Geometry, Position & Measurement
Key Stage 2 (Other Topics)
SATs
Worksheets & Practice Questions


Secondary Maths

Key Stage 3
Key Stage 4 & GCSE
Worksheets & Practice Questions


More Maths Support

Home Learning
Dictionary & Wiki
Games & Activities


Third Space Updates
 


 




x

Blog home

Interventions

School Interventions
Tutoring


SLT and Maths Leads

Leadership
Ofsted
Maths Mastery
Teaching and Learning


Primary Maths

Four Operations
Place Value & Number
Fractions, Decimals & Percentages
Geometry, Position & Measurement
Key Stage 2 (Other Topics)
SATs
Worksheets & Practice Questions


Secondary Maths

Key Stage 3
Key Stage 4 & GCSE
Worksheets & Practice Questions


More Maths Support

Home Learning
Dictionary & Wiki
Games & Activities


Third Space Updates
 

 


 








                Teacher-Trusted Tutoring            

                Personalised one to one tutoring that boosts confidence and doubles progress            

                Preview lessons            







            FREE daily maths challenges        

            A new KS2 maths challenge every day. Perfect as lesson starters - no prep required!        

 
                View today's challenge            








Contents










						Games & Activities					


					9 Famous Female Mathematicians Who Have Changed The World & What We Can Learn From Them				


						August 23, 2023 |
					

						5 min read					






								Ellie Williams							




Chances are you’re probably well aware of Newton, Einstein and Turing, but when it comes to famous female mathematicians, their achievements are less well known.
Unfortunately, there is a stereotype that still prevails today that maths is a male subject and that girls are no good at it.
Fortunately though, that couldn’t be any further from the truth, and so in celebration of International Women’s Day we’ve put together a fabulous list of some of the world’s greatest famous female mathematicians that you can use all year round. 
We hope you can use these inspirational individuals and their incredible work to show children that maths is all about the journey of discovery, not someone’s gender. 
1. Maryam Mirzakhani, 1977-2017
What Maryam did: Iranian-born Maryam Mirzakhani was one of the greatest mathematicians of her generation, making exceptional contributions to the study of the dynamics and geometry of mathematical objects called Riemann surfaces.
She was a professor at Stanford University and held a Ph.D from Harvard University. In 2014, she was the first woman, and first Iranian, to be awarded a Fields Medal (also known as the International Medal for Outstanding Discoveries in Mathematics) for “her outstanding contributions to the dynamics and geometry of Riemann surfaces and their moduli spaces”.
Maryam’s impact: Her work had a huge impact in shaping her field and has opened up new frontiers of research that are just starting to be explored. She shows us that, even in a male-dominated field, women can be role models and lead the way forward with their discoveries.

#1 Maryam Mirzakhani
2. Katherine Johnson, 1918 – 2020
What Katherine did: Falling in love with maths from a young age, Katherine studied the subject alongside French at university, graduating summa cum laude at the age of just 18! She joined NASA in 1953 and her contributions in orbital mechanics were crucial to the success of the USA’s aeronautics and space programmes. In 2015, she was presented with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Barack Obama for her important work as a mathematician, physicist and space scientist as a woman of colour.
Katherine’s impact: Despite being one of the first three black women to attend West Virginia University, she dared to challenge the stereotypes which existed around her and has since become a pioneering example and role model for females everywhere of African American women in STEM.
She was responsible for calculating the trajectory for Project Mercury and the Apollo 11 flight to the moon, which means she helped the first spaceship and the first Americans reach the moon! Believing that “everything is physics and math(s)”, she encouraged girls to pursue careers in STEM and often gave talks on the subject.

 “Girls are capable of doing everything men are capable of doing.”


Katherine Johnson was rejected by NASA the first time she applied, but she didn’t give up!



 


						KS2 Maths Games and Activities Pack					

						A FREE downloadable games and activity pack, including 20 home learning maths activities for KS2 children to complete on their own or with a partner. 					

						Download Free Now!
					


3. Dame Mary Lucy Cartwright, 1900-1998
What she did: Mary Cartwright was a British mathematician and a woman of many firsts! She was not only the first woman to obtain a first in her university degree, but also one of the first mathematicians to study what is now known as chaos theory. She was the first woman to receive the Sylvester Medal (awarded for the encouragement of mathematical research), the first woman to be President of the Mathematical Association and the first woman to be President of the London Mathematical Society.
Mary’s impact: Thanks to her bravery in daring to defy the status quo, her work has gone on to strongly influence the modern theory of dynamical systems, and she even has a mathematical theorem named after her!

#3 Mary Cartwright
4. Sofia Kovalevskaya, 1850 – 1891
What Sofia did: Russian mathematician Sofia Kovalevskaya made monumental contributions to analysis, partial differential equations and mechanics. She was a pioneer and icon for females in mathematics and STEM subjects everywhere.
The first woman to obtain a doctorate in mathematics, she went on to gain global recognition in the mathematical community due to her paper on partial differential equations and was awarded the Prix Bordin from the French Academy of Sciences, a prize given to the best solution of a specific mathematical problem.
Sofia’s impact: Despite scrutiny and doubts from her male counterparts and society as a whole, Sofia refused to give up academia and has paved the way for other famous females mathematicians to follow in her footsteps!

#4 Sofia Kovalevskaya
5. Sophie Germain, 1776 – 1831
What Sophie did: Marie-Sophie Germain was a French mathematician and physicist who, despite opposition from society (and her parents) due to her sex, persevered and went on to greatly contribute to maths. Due to the unfair gender restraints at the time, she was not able to pursue a career in the subject, but that did not stop her!
She worked on it independently throughout her life and through her hard work, she not only advanced the field of number theory, but was also one of the pioneers of elasticity theory, becoming the first woman to win the grand prize from the Paris Academy of Sciences for her essay on the subject.
Sophie’s impact: She proved to the people around her that their assumptions based on her sex were wrong and that females are incredible mathematicians. Although she was not allowed to attend university, thanks to her unfaltering determination and bravery she became the very first woman to make important original contributions to mathematical research and in doing so, carved out the way for women today.

#5 Sophie Germain
6. Marjorie Lee Browne, 1914-1979
What Marjorie did: Gifted African-American mathematician and educator Marjorie Lee Browne was the first black woman to gain a doctorate in maths. She joined the faculty at North Carolina Central University, shortly after obtaining her Ph.D, where she taught for over thirty years. She was named chair of the Mathematics Department there in 1951, which allowed her to guide the way for some of the earliest computer use in her field.
Marjorie’s impact: She noted that the lack of involvement of black women in STEM subjects was a huge societal issue that needed to be addressed and believed that education was a viable solution. She took advantage of her position as department chair at NCCU to gain a grant to educate secondary school teachers in advanced maths and spent much of her time with local secondary school teachers teaching them about linear algebra, encouraging them to study and obtain advanced degrees and improving the level of maths education as a whole in North Carolina. Her dedication to inspiring confidence in female mathematicians and providing quality education to others for the greater good, has helped her to become a role model for women in STEM everywhere.

“If I had to live my life again, I wouldn’t do anything else. I love mathematics.”


#6 Marjorie Lee Browne
7. Rachel Riley
What Rachel did: Television presenter Rachel Riley studied Mathematics at Oxford University. At age 22 she joined Countdown where she applies her maths skills on a regular basis, handling the letters and numbers rounds to find solutions to complicated problems. She has gone on to present other shows including 8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown and The Gadget Show, and even starred as a contestant on Strictly Come Dancing!
Rachel’s impact: Riley has visited many schools over the years in an endeavour to inspire children on the “joys of applied maths, quantum mechanics and time travel” and increase the numbers of females participating in STEM subjects. She has shown us that pursuing your passion and studying maths at university can lead to us down different avenues, including less conventional ones such as a career in television!

“There’s no reason for men to be better at maths than women – it’s just about our perception.”




#7 Rachel Riley



8. Malala Yousafzai
What Malala did: Malala Yousafzai is a Pakistani activist for female educational rights, and the youngest person to win the Nobel Peace Prize, at just age 17! She started participating in activism when she was only 11 years of age and began writing blogs for the BBC detailing what life was like under Taliban rule and her beliefs on the important role education plays for girls across the world – and especially in Pakistan.
In her home province of Swat Valley, girls were banned from attending school by the Taliban. After appearing in the New York Times documentary, she gained global recognition as a speaker on the education of girls, and has brought about huge change in this area ever since.
She took A-Level Mathematics and is currently studying Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PPE) at Oxford University. She has won many awards and has been named one of Time Magazine’s “100 Most Influential People in the World”!
Malala’s impact: Due to the nature of Malala’s work, an attempt was made on her life when she was on her way to school one morning. It was unsuccessful, and she refused to let this stop her fighting for her cause, continuing to give speeches and interviews for women’s educational rights. Her story drove the United Nations to launch a campaign for the education of all of children worldwide, which ultimately led to Pakistan’s first Right to Education Bill.
Malala’s brave and determined actions illustrate that females do have the power to change the world regardless of contemporary societal beliefs and that education can be a force for that change! She also shows us that education is a privilege, so, if we want to go on and study maths, we should!

“Education is neither eastern nor western. Education is education and it’s the right of every human being.”


#8 Malala Yousafzai
9. Mayim Bialik
What Mayim did: American actress Mayim Bialik studied neuroscience at UCLA, where she went on to obtain a Ph.D in 2007. She is best known for her role as Dr. Amy Fowler in the comedy The Big Bang Theory, but has starred in countless other television shows and films.
Mayim’s impact: Despite success in her early acting career, Mayim still decided to study neuroscience at university because she had a passion for the subject. She believes strongly in the involvement of women in STEM subjects and has spoken at events on the topic encouraging girls to pursue these disciplines. She also plays the bass and trumpet! 

#9 Mayim Bialik 
Here’s our complete list of topical maths investigations for year 5 and year 6.
Autumn Term maths investigations year 6 and year 5

Autumn maths activities
Halloween maths activities
Bonfire Night maths activities
Christmas maths activities

Spring Term maths investigations year 6 and year 5

Heart Month Months activities
Shrove Tuesday Maths activities
Pancake Day Maths activities
World Book Day Maths activities
International Women’s Day Maths activities
British Science Week Maths activities
Holi Maths activities
Easter/Lent Maths activities

Summer term maths investigations year 6 and year 5

Share-a-Story Month activities
FA Cup Maths activities
Walk to School Week activities
Ramadan Maths activities
Child Safety Week activities

And if that’s not enough we’ve even got maths activities for Year 5 and Year 6 for events you’re likely to celebrate in primary school but don’t come round every year… 

Red Nose Day Maths activities
World Cup Maths activities
Election Maths
Jubilee Maths activities






DO YOU HAVE PUPILS WHO NEED MORE SUPPORT IN MATHS?
 
Every week Third Space Learning’s maths specialist tutors support thousands of students across hundreds of schools with weekly primary school tuition designed to plug gaps and boost progress.
 
Since 2013 these personalised one to one lessons have helped over 150,000 primary and secondary students become more confident, able mathematicians.
 
Learn about the emphasis on building a positive maths mindset or request a personalised quote for your school to speak to us about your school’s needs and how we can help.








Share:



















Related articles






 


													The Best Free Multiplication Games To Play At KS1 & KS2 For Classroom Engagement												

													8 min read												








 


													9 Coronation Maths Activities For Schools: Coronation Fun For KS1 and KS2 												

													8 min read												








 


													18 Brilliant Mental Maths Games To Build Number Fluency, Speed And Stamina In KS1 & KS2 												

													12 min read												








 


													The 24 Best Free KS3 Maths Games For Engagement At School and Home												

													12 min read												












x




                                FREE 12 Maths Club Activities for Primary Schools (Years 1 to 6)                            

A collection of games and activities to make maths enjoyable in a primary school maths club!
Minimal resources are needed for each activity. 

                                Download free                            































                            68 Hanbury Street, London E1 5JL
                        











                            hello@thirdspacelearning.com










                            0203 771 0095











                            Contact us




                            Press enquiries












 














Maths Interventions
Primary Maths Tutoring
Secondary Maths Tutoring
Year 3-5 Tutoring Programmes
Year 6 & SATs Tutoring Programmes
KS3 Tutoring Programmes
GCSE Tutoring Programmes
How it works
Pricing
Case studies
 

Policies
Data Protection & Privacy Policy
Cookies Policy
Terms of service
GDPR Compliance
Safeguarding children
Anti slavery policy
Complaints Procedure
 

Popular Blogs
SATs Results 2023
Maths Games
Online Tutoring
Long Division Method
Teaching Strategies
2D and 3D Shapes
BODMAS or BIDMAS?
Division
Multiplication
Times Tables
 

Quick Links
GCSE Maths Revision
Maths Intervention Programmes
Online Maths Tuition
Maths Tuition
One To One Tuition
Primary School Tuition
School Tutors
Online Maths Tutors
Primary Maths Tutors
GCSE Maths Tutors
Online GCSE Maths Tutors
 

Company
About us
Careers
Blog
Insight – Girls and Mathematics
Insight – What Maths Do We Need
Insight – Maths and Careers
 

Popular GCSE maths guides
GCSE maths past papers
GCSE maths questions
GCSE maths topics
Simultaneous equations
Nth term
Circle theorems
Factorising
 



©
                    2024 Third Space Learning. All rights reserved.Third Space Learning is the
                    trading name of Virtual Class Ltd
                





We use essential and non-essential cookies to improve the experience on our website. Please read our Cookies Policy for information on how we use cookies and how to manage or change your cookie settings.AcceptPrivacy & Cookies Policy




Close






Privacy Overview 
This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may affect your browsing experience.

 





								Necessary							


Necessary

Always Enabled




									Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.								






								Non-necessary							


Non-necessary





									Any cookies that may not be particularly necessary for the website to function and is used specifically to collect user personal data via analytics, ads, other embedded contents are termed as non-necessary cookies. It is mandatory to procure user consent prior to running these cookies on your website.								












SAVE & ACCEPT










 

















