 




















A (very) brief history of infinity - Polytechnique Insights
























































FR


EN








Polytechnique insights
A REVIEW BY INSTITUT POLYTECHNIQUE DE PARIS








Columns


Braincamps







FR


EN






Sign up for the newsletter





Subscribe to our weekly newsletter






I have read and accepted the privacy policy.

























π Planet
				



π Energy
				



π Health and biotech
				



π Digital
				



π Space
				



π Economics
				



π Industry
				



π Science and technology
				



π Society
				



π Geopolitics
				



π Neuroscience
				



π Videos
				













Polytechnique insights
A REVIEW BY INSTITUT POLYTECHNIQUE DE PARIS



























					Share
				












 Copié !






Subscribe to our weekly newsletter



Newsletter



Subscribe to our weekly newsletter


									Valider
								




									I have read and accepted the privacy policy.
								





















Home / Chroniques / A (very) brief history of infinity



















			On the same topic:
        



						How humans will live on the Moon
                    



						Scouring Mars for answers to life on Earth
                    



						Seeking out life forms on Jupiter’s moons
                    











π Space
										


							A (very) brief history of infinity
							


On February 23rd, 2022



4 min reading time












Pierre Henriquet
 Doctor in Nuclear Physics and Columnist at Polytechnique Insights








Key takeaways 


Infinity is a mathematical concept originating from Zeno of Elia (~450 BC) who tried to show its “physical” impossibility. This resulted in the “arrow paradox”, but which was solved later on.
Many mathematicians and physicists went on to try understanding infinity and to explain it by various theories and experiments.
Georg Cantor went further than anyone else by asking a simple question: can we compare two sets of infinite numbers? Can one be “bigger” than the other?
His method consists of pairing an element of the first set with an element of the second. If each element finds its partner and none remains alone (this is called a bijection), then we can say that the two sets are equal.
The Von Koch flake is constructed by adding a triangle on each edge of the previous figure and has an infinite perimeter.




Once con­sid­ered as a sacred con­cept (only God is infi­nite) or a meta­phys­i­cal one (the human mind will nev­er be able to entire­ly con­ceive it), infin­i­ty has since entered the domain of sci­ence and tech­nol­o­gy. Today, we mea­sure it, com­pare it, study it, and use it almost like a nor­mal number.
But what is infin­i­ty? And how did we learn to tame it?
An old story
It seems that ques­tions about infin­i­ty are almost as old as human­i­ty. Unfor­tu­nate­ly, the writ­ings that attest to this are all the rar­er because they are old. We know that the philoso­phers of the first mil­len­ni­um B.C. were already won­der­ing about the amaz­ing prop­er­ties of infinity.
But is infin­i­ty only a con­cept? A weird idea that math­e­mati­cians play with? Or does it have a con­nec­tion with the world around us? Is any­thing real­ly infi­nite?
For Anax­i­man­der, infin­i­ty is the found­ing prin­ci­ple of real­i­ty. From it are born an infi­nite num­ber of worlds that fill the vol­ume of the Uni­verse. For Her­a­cli­tus, on the oth­er hand, it is time that is infi­nite. It has always been and will always be. It is through infin­i­ty that we per­ceive our own existence.
Of course, none of these state­ments are sup­port­ed by an “exper­i­ment” or a “mea­sure­ment” by cur­rent sci­en­tif­ic stan­dards. It is more a philo­soph­i­cal posi­tion that dif­fer­en­ti­ates one school of thought from another.
From mathematics to physics
Of course, infin­i­ty is first and fore­most a math­e­mat­i­cal con­cept. And it is math­e­mati­cians who took it upon them­selves to observe it a lit­tle clos­er. Zeno of Elia (~450 BC) tried to show the “phys­i­cal” impos­si­bil­i­ty of infin­i­ty, not by mea­sur­ing it but by using it to divide things into small­er and small­er elements.
The result is his famous “arrow para­dox” that, accord­ing to him, should nev­er be able to hit its tar­get. Indeed, one can always divide its remain­ing path by two and there will always remain a por­tion of path to cov­er (1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32), ad infini­tum.
Since it takes an infi­nite num­ber of steps to cross the dis­tance between the bow and the tar­get, Zeno con­clud­ed that it was impos­si­ble for the arrow to reach its des­ti­na­tion in a finite time.
How­ev­er, this para­dox was solved much lat­er by one of the branch­es of math­e­mat­ics that stud­ies infi­nite sums of num­bers: the series.
Adding 1/2+ 1/4+ 1/8+ 1/16+… is like adding 1/2+ 1/22+ 1/23+ 1/24+…
This series is called a geo­met­ric series. It is writ­ten in the form: 

Its res­o­lu­tion is very sim­ple. When n tends to infin­i­ty, the val­ue of this sum tends nat­u­ral­ly to 1.
A schemat­ic res­o­lu­tion is even sim­pler. In the fig­ure below, we can intu­itive­ly see that, to fill a square with side 1, we must add the ele­ments whose area cor­re­sponds exact­ly to the series above it.
The geo­met­ric series 12n fills a square of side (and area) equal to 1
What Zeno was miss­ing was the coun­ter­in­tu­itive result that the sum of an infi­nite num­ber of num­bers does not always give an infi­nite result.
In oth­er words, it is not because the tra­jec­to­ry of the arrow can be decom­posed into an infi­nite num­ber that the time it will take to cov­er them will be infi­nite. Para­dox solved. The arrows can now reach their tar­get with com­plete peace of mind.
Lat­er, Isaac New­ton per­fect­ed the art of mea­sur­ing arbi­trar­i­ly small val­ues by devel­op­ing infin­i­tes­i­mal cal­cu­lus. This led to the famous deriv­a­tives (and inte­gers) which math­e­mat­ics, but also mod­ern physics, could not do with­out today to describe and under­stand the world.
Comparing infinities
There is no need to under­stand or visu­alise infin­i­ty to use it. In the end, infin­i­ty is just a tool among many oth­ers that math­e­mat­ics puts at our dis­pos­al to mea­sure, cal­cu­late and under­stand our environment.
But a Ger­man math­e­mati­cian from the end of the 19th Cen­tu­ry went much fur­ther than any­one else at the time to manip­u­late infin­i­ty, or more pre­cise­ly infi­nite sets.
Georg Can­tor asked him­self a sim­ple ques­tion: can we com­pare two infi­nite sets? Can one be “big­ger” than the other?
His answer lies in the way he com­pares two sets: instead of count­ing the num­ber of ele­ments of the lat­ter and com­par­ing them (which can­not be done with an infi­nite set), the method con­sists in try­ing to match an ele­ment of the first set with an ele­ment of the sec­ond. If each ele­ment finds its part­ner and none remains alone (we call this a bijec­tion), we can then say that the two sets are equal. And this method applies to both finite and infi­nite sets.
The two sets A and B are the same size because there is at least one way to match each ele­ment of A with an ele­ment of B (bijec­tion).
This is how we can prove that the size of the (infi­nite) set of pos­i­tive inte­gers is strict­ly equal to that of the set of inte­gers (pos­i­tive and negative).
What’s more, we can also show that, although there are infi­nite­ly many frac­tions between two inte­gers, the size of the set of inte­gers is strict­ly equal to the size of the set of num­bers that are writ­ten as frac­tions. How­ev­er, it has also been proven that the set of real num­bers (all num­bers writ­ten with a dec­i­mal point and a finite or infi­nite num­ber of dec­i­mal places) is strict­ly larg­er than the set of integers.
As counter-intu­itive as it may seem, two dif­fer­ent infini­ties can have the same size, but, con­verse­ly, not all infini­ties are equal.
Impossible geometries
Can we draw fig­ures with infi­nite parameters?
Besides the cir­cle (which can be con­sid­ered as a poly­gon with an infi­nite num­ber of sides), oth­er strange fig­ures start­ed to emerge dur­ing the sec­ond half of the 20th Cen­tu­ry: fractals.
One way to cre­ate them is to build them by iter­a­tion, step by step. After an infi­nite num­ber of steps, the fig­ure is fin­ished, and we can study its prop­er­ties. The Von Koch flake, for exam­ple, is an extra­or­di­nary fig­ure: although its sur­face is finite, its perime­ter is infinite.
The Von Koch flake is con­struct­ed by adding a tri­an­gle on each edge of the pre­vi­ous fig­ure – up to infinity
This kind of geom­e­try has been suc­cess­ful­ly applied in the field of telecom­mu­ni­ca­tions. Since the end of the 80’s, frac­tal anten­nas have been devel­oped, whose length, if not infi­nite, is very large, but whose vol­ume remains small, which allows to obtain com­pact and effi­cient systems.



Contributors








Pierre Henriquet
 Doctor in Nuclear Physics and Columnist at Polytechnique Insights




After a doctorate in Nuclear Physics applied to Medicine and a university degree in Astronomy/Astrophysics, Pierre Henriquet worked for 10 years at the Planetarium of the city of Vaulx-en-Velin where he perfected his talents as a science communicator with multiple audiences, both novices and specialists. Today, he is a freelance writer and mediator of science.


Other contributions

Quantum, the indispensable ally of modern medicine
Health, tech, space: quantum technology is already benefiting many sectors
Quantum physics has already changed the world
Space industry: what are the scientific and geopolitical challenges for Europe?
Voyage to Mars: myth or reality?

Voir toutes ses contributions


 















											More on this topic
										


















π Planet
                                                

π Space
                                                


                                        How to monitor climate change from space
                                    

                                                                             Cyril Crevoisier,  CNRS Research Director at the Dynamic Meteorology Laboratory (LMD*) at the École Polytechnique (IP Paris)


On December 15th, 2021



4 min reading time















π Space
                                                

π Science and technology
                                                


                                        Plasma: a future fuel for satellites 
                                    

                                                                             Pascal Chabert,  CNRS Research Director at the Plasma Physics Laboratory (LPP*) and Lecturer at École Polytechnique (IP Paris)


On December 6th, 2022



3 min reading time















π Space
                                                


                                        What are the risks of space for humans?
                                    

                                                                             Pierre Henriquet,  Doctor in Nuclear Physics and Columnist at Polytechnique Insights


On November 30th, 2022



6 min reading time















π Science and technology
                                                

π Space
                                                


                                        Detecting life on other planets with lasers
                                    

                                                                             Ricardo Arévalo,  Associate Professor at the University of Maryland


On May 31st, 2023



4 min reading time















π Space
                                                

π Economics
                                                


                                        New Space: the changing face of the space industry
                                    

                                                                             Pierre Henriquet,  Doctor in Nuclear Physics and Columnist at Polytechnique Insights


On November 3rd, 2022



5 min reading time

















Subscribe to our weekly newsletter


Subscribe to our weekly newsletter










                        I have read and accepted the privacy policy.
                    









Our selection of braincamps














π Space
                                                

π Science and technology
                                                


Satellites, black holes, exoplanets: when science extends beyond our planet

6                                              episodes
                                        















π Space
                                                

π Science and technology
                                                

π Energy
                                                


The challenges of extraterrestrial mining

3                                              episodes
                                        















π Space
                                                


How Space telescopes unravel the mysteries of the cosmos

3                                              episodes
                                        





























About us


Sponsors


Contributors


Legal notices


Contact



Cookie Settings















Our world explained with science. Every week, in your inbox.
Get the newsletter


















