



abstract algebra - What is the overall idea of Galois theory? - Mathematics Stack Exchange







































 


Skip to main content










Stack Exchange Network

						Stack Exchange network consists of 183 Q&A communities including Stack Overflow, the largest, most trusted online community for developers to learn, share their knowledge, and build their careers.
					
Visit Stack Exchange












Loading…



















                                Tour
                                
                                    Start here for a quick overview of the site
                                




                            Help Center
                            
                                Detailed answers to any questions you might have
                            




                                        Meta
                                        
                                            Discuss the workings and policies of this site
                                        




                                    About Us
                                    
                                        Learn more about Stack Overflow the company, and our products
                                    














current community
















            Mathematics
        



help
chat









            Mathematics Meta
        






your communities            



Sign up or log in to customize your list.                


more stack exchange communities

company blog








Log in

Sign up






















 Home






 Questions






 Tags







 Users






 Unanswered






Teams



            Ask questions, find answers and collaborate at work with Stack Overflow for Teams.
        
Explore Teams
Create a free Team




Teams







            Ask questions, find answers and collaborate at work with Stack Overflow for Teams.
            Explore Teams








Teams
Q&A for work
Connect and share knowledge within a single location that is structured and easy to search.

                    Learn more about Teams
                











What is the overall idea of Galois theory?



        Ask Question
    





Asked
9 years, 7 months ago


Modified
3 years, 2 months ago


Viewed
                        3k times
                    

















            16
        












$\begingroup$

I am a third year undergraduate, doing a course on Field and Galois theory. Now, while I seem to understand most of the concepts locally, I do not seem to get the 'Whole picture' of what is happening in Galois theory, and things seem to be a bit disconnected. I would be grateful if some could help me get an overall picture of the subject. The whole, I believe, is greater than the sum of its parts.
I am familiar with the concepts of field theory, such as extensions, separability, splitting fields, finite fields and all the other basic concepts you would expect to know to study Galois theory, and also have a fair understanding of the main concepts of Galois theory. I just dont get the whole picture. Thanks.




abstract-algebrasoft-questionfield-theorygalois-theorybig-picture









Share


Cite



                        Follow
                        










edited Nov 2, 2014 at 12:42






Shaun

45.6k1919 gold badges6868 silver badges179179 bronze badges








            asked Nov 2, 2014 at 12:41






user13987user13987

30522 silver badges77 bronze badges






$\endgroup$

16






3




$\begingroup$
Start with the fundamental theorem of Galois theory (for finite Galois extensions, and infinite ones). This gives a good idea about the whole picture.
$\endgroup$

– Dietrich Burde

Nov 2, 2014 at 12:46






2




$\begingroup$
A rational polynomial is solvable by radicals if, and only if, its Galois group is solvable.
$\endgroup$

– Git Gud

Nov 2, 2014 at 12:47






4




$\begingroup$
As others have pointed out, one of the central points of Galois theory is that you can study field extensions by doing group theory.
$\endgroup$

– Hayden

Nov 2, 2014 at 12:48






6




$\begingroup$
The idea is even more general. Having some object, you can get to study the objects containing your object or that are contained in your object by looking at the subgroups of the group of automorphisms of your object. Mainly, you can get results in your subject via group theory.
$\endgroup$

– Lolman

Nov 2, 2014 at 13:08






2




$\begingroup$
@user138359 in the chapter 1.3 about covering spaces in Hatcher, Algebraic topology we relate a locally simply connected topological space with its fundamental group, and the subgroups of it as all the possible connected coverings of it.  On a different note: Jacobson's Basic Algebra 2 page 467 we have a relation between subfields with finite codimensions of some field $E$ correspond to a set of endomorphisms of $E$.
$\endgroup$

– Lolman

Nov 2, 2014 at 14:07







 | 
Show 11 more comments










                                        1 Answer
                                    1






            Sorted by:
        

            Reset to default
        




                        Highest score (default)
                    

                        Date modified (newest first)
                    

                        Date created (oldest first)
                    
















            9
        

















$\begingroup$

Galois theory is a branch of abstract algebra that gives a connection between field theory and group theory, by reducing field theoretic problems to group theoretic problems. 
It started out by using permutation groups to give a description of how various roots of a polynomial equation are related, but nowadays, Galois theory has expanded to involve automorphisms of field extensions. 
It was motivated by looking for the roots of fifth degree polynomials in terms of the coefficients of the polynomial using algebraic operations and the application of radicals. Galois answered this question and gave us a method for examining/checking that an equation higher degree can be solved in this way. 
The epitome of Galois theory is the fundamental theorem of Galois theory. It describes the structure of field extensions. It says that for a finite and Galois field extension $E/F,$ there is a one-to-one correspondence between its intermediate fields and subgroups of its Galois group.  
Does that help?








Share


Cite



                        Follow
                        










            answered Apr 29, 2015 at 16:20






        user230715user230715







$\endgroup$

1










$\begingroup$
Yes it does, thanks.
$\endgroup$

– user13987

May 5, 2015 at 13:11






Add a comment
 | 






                                    You must log in to answer this question.
                                


Not the answer you're looking for? Browse other questions tagged abstract-algebrasoft-questionfield-theorygalois-theorybig-picture.                                









Related



3

Finding Polynomials of Intermediate Galois extensions



8

First examples in Galois theory



3

Topology in Infinite Galois Theory.



3

Basics of fields/field extensions



3

Galois Theory without the Primitive Element Theorem



4

Does a Galois extension always have the same order over the field from which it is extended for which polynomial it is a splitting field for?



3

Question on Garling Approach to Galois Theory







            Hot Network Questions
        




                    How could the switch from steam to diesel locomotives be delayed 20-30 years?
                



                    How to make the battle against Tiamat last longer?
                



                    Create repeating geometry across a face
                



                    Why Did The Drywall Tape Fail in My Garage? And How Can I Fix It?
                



                    Find characters common among all strings
                



                    British child with Italian mother. Which document can she use to travel to/from Italy on her own?
                



                    What happens to the souls of non-evil creatures when they reach their aligned outer plane?
                



                    Can this flying island survive a 15kt nuke? (and if yes, how much more can it take?)
                



                    TikZ - how to draw ticks on circle perpendicularly with ellipses around?
                



                    Proving differentiability by testing continuity of the partials?
                



                    What does "far right tilt" actually mean in the context of the EU in 2024?
                



                    Found possible instance of plagiarism in joint review paper and PhD thesis of high profile collaborator, what to do?
                



                    Do you still cross out and redo the page numbers if you do it wrong in your scientific notebook?
                



                    Can someone explain the damage distrubution on this aircraft that flew through a hailstorm?
                



                    Book where the populace is split between two sects, that of the “hand” and that of the “mind"
                



                    Are dichotomous categorical variables technically interval/continuous measures?
                



                    Is a weak appliance behind a reverse proxy affecting the security of the home network?
                



                    In the Unabomber case, was "call Nathan R" really mistakenly written by a New York Times intern?
                



                    How do I emphasize a sentence without making it seem like the character is shouting?
                



                    Is this deck post getting cracks due to overloaded?
                



                    Expected Amp difference going from SEU-AL to Copper on HVAC?
                



                    What do humans do uniquely, that computers apparently will not be able to?
                



                    Structure that holds the twin-engine on an aircraft
                



                    70s or 80s film or TV show with a handgun that fires backwards and a torture chamber that burns the skin off and chars the victims black
                



            more hot questions
        




            Question feed
        




                Subscribe to RSS
            



                        Question feed
                        To subscribe to this RSS feed, copy and paste this URL into your RSS reader.
























Mathematics

Tour
Help
Chat
Contact
Feedback



Company

Stack Overflow
Teams
Advertising
Collectives
Talent
About
Press
Legal
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Cookie Settings
Cookie Policy




Stack Exchange Network



                                    Technology
                                



                                    Culture & recreation
                                



                                    Life & arts
                                



                                    Science
                                



                                    Professional
                                



                                    Business
                                



                                    API
                                



                                    Data
                                







Blog
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Instagram


Site design / logo © 2024 Stack Exchange Inc; user contributions licensed under CC BY-SA.                    rev 2024.6.11.10735












