



Algebraic topology - Wikipedia




































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file



















Search











Search





























Create account

Log in








Personal tools





 Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Main branches




Toggle Main branches subsection





1.1
Homotopy groups








1.2
Homology








1.3
Cohomology








1.4
Manifolds








1.5
Knot theory








1.6
Complexes










2
Method of algebraic invariants








3
Setting in category theory








4
Applications








5
Notable people








6
Important theorems








7
See also








8
Notes








9
References








10
Further reading


















Toggle the table of contents







Algebraic topology



43 languages




العربيةAsturianuবাংলাБашҡортсаБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어ՀայերենHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתქართულიLatinaမြန်မာဘာသာNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt粵語中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikibooksWikiquote

























From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Branch of mathematics
For the topology of pointwise convergence, see Algebraic topology (object).
A torus, one of the most frequently studied objects in algebraic topology
Algebraic topology is a branch of mathematics that uses tools from abstract algebra to study topological spaces. The basic goal is to find algebraic invariants that classify topological spaces up to homeomorphism, though usually most classify up to homotopy equivalence.
Although algebraic topology primarily uses algebra to study topological problems, using topology to solve algebraic problems is sometimes also possible. Algebraic topology, for example, allows for a convenient proof that any subgroup of a free group is again a free group.


Main branches[edit]
Below are some of the main areas studied in algebraic topology:

Homotopy groups[edit]
Main article: Homotopy group
In mathematics, homotopy groups are used in algebraic topology to classify topological spaces. The first and simplest homotopy group is the fundamental group, which records information about loops in a space. Intuitively, homotopy groups record information about the basic shape, or holes, of a topological space.

Homology[edit]
Main article: Homology
In algebraic topology and abstract algebra, homology (in part from Greek ὁμός homos "identical") is a certain general procedure to associate a sequence of abelian groups or modules with a given mathematical object such as a topological space or a group.[1]

Cohomology[edit]
Main article: Cohomology
In homology theory and algebraic topology, cohomology is a general term for a sequence of abelian groups defined from a cochain complex. That is, cohomology is defined as the abstract study of cochains, cocycles, and coboundaries. Cohomology can be viewed as a method of assigning algebraic invariants to a topological space that has a more refined algebraic structure than does homology. Cohomology arises from the algebraic dualization of the construction of homology. In less abstract language, cochains in the fundamental sense should assign "quantities" to the chains of homology theory.

Manifolds[edit]
Main article: Manifold
A manifold is a topological space that near each point resembles Euclidean space. Examples include the plane, the sphere, and the torus, which can all be realized in three dimensions, but also the Klein bottle and real projective plane which cannot be embedded in three dimensions, but can be embedded in four dimensions. Typically, results in algebraic topology focus on global, non-differentiable aspects of manifolds; for example Poincaré duality.

Knot theory[edit]
Main article: Knot theory
Knot theory is the study of mathematical knots. While inspired by knots that appear in daily life in shoelaces and rope, a mathematician's knot differs in that the ends are joined so that it cannot be undone. In precise mathematical language, a knot is an embedding of a circle in three-dimensional Euclidean space, 





R


3




{\displaystyle \mathbb {R} ^{3}}

. Two mathematical knots are equivalent if one can be transformed into the other via a deformation of 





R


3




{\displaystyle \mathbb {R} ^{3}}

 upon itself (known as an ambient isotopy); these transformations correspond to manipulations of a knotted string that do not involve cutting the string or passing the string through itself.

Complexes[edit]
Main articles: Simplicial complex and CW complex
A simplicial 3-complex.
A simplicial complex is a topological space of a certain kind, constructed by "gluing together" points, line segments, triangles, and their n-dimensional counterparts (see illustration). Simplicial complexes should not be confused with the more abstract notion of a simplicial set appearing in modern simplicial homotopy theory. The purely combinatorial counterpart to a simplicial complex is an abstract simplicial complex.
A CW complex is a type of topological space introduced by J. H. C. Whitehead to meet the needs of homotopy theory. This class of spaces is broader and has some better categorical properties than simplicial complexes, but still retains a combinatorial nature that allows for computation (often with a much smaller complex).

Method of algebraic invariants[edit]
An older name for the subject was combinatorial topology, implying an emphasis on how a space X was constructed from simpler ones[2] (the modern standard tool for such construction is the CW complex). In the 1920s and 1930s, there was growing emphasis on investigating topological spaces by finding correspondences from them to algebraic groups, which led to the change of name to algebraic topology.[3] The combinatorial topology name is still sometimes used to emphasize an algorithmic approach based on decomposition of spaces.[4]
In the algebraic approach, one finds a correspondence between spaces and groups that respects the relation of homeomorphism (or more general homotopy) of spaces. This allows one to recast statements about topological spaces into statements about groups, which have a great deal of manageable structure, often making these statements easier to prove. Two major ways in which this can be done are through fundamental groups, or more generally homotopy theory, and through homology and cohomology groups. The fundamental groups give us basic information about the structure of a topological space, but they are often nonabelian and can be difficult to work with. The fundamental group of a (finite) simplicial complex does have a finite presentation.
Homology and cohomology groups, on the other hand, are abelian and in many important cases finitely generated. Finitely generated abelian groups are completely classified and are particularly easy to work with.

Setting in category theory[edit]
In general, all constructions of algebraic topology are functorial; the notions of category, functor and natural transformation originated here. Fundamental groups and homology and cohomology groups are not only invariants of the underlying topological space, in the sense that two topological spaces which are homeomorphic have the same associated groups, but their associated morphisms also correspond—a continuous mapping of spaces induces a group homomorphism on the associated groups, and these homomorphisms can be used to show non-existence (or, much more deeply, existence) of mappings.
One of the first mathematicians to work with different types of cohomology was Georges de Rham. One can use the differential structure of smooth manifolds via de Rham cohomology, or Čech or sheaf cohomology to investigate the solvability of differential equations defined on the manifold in question. De Rham showed that all of these approaches were interrelated and that, for a closed, oriented manifold, the Betti numbers derived through simplicial homology were the same Betti numbers as those derived through de Rham cohomology. This was extended in the 1950s, when Samuel Eilenberg and Norman Steenrod generalized this approach. They defined homology and cohomology as functors equipped with natural transformations subject to certain axioms (e.g., a weak equivalence of spaces passes to an isomorphism of homology groups), verified that all existing (co)homology theories satisfied these axioms, and then proved that such an axiomatization uniquely characterized the theory.

Applications[edit]
Classic applications of algebraic topology include:

The Brouwer fixed point theorem: every continuous map from the unit n-disk to itself has a fixed point.
The free rank of the nth homology group of a simplicial complex is the nth Betti number, which allows one to calculate the Euler–Poincaré characteristic.
One can use the differential structure of smooth manifolds via de Rham cohomology, or Čech or sheaf cohomology to investigate the solvability of differential equations defined on the manifold in question.
A manifold is orientable when the top-dimensional integral homology group is the integers, and is non-orientable when it is 0.
The n-sphere admits a nowhere-vanishing continuous unit vector field if and only if n is odd. (For n = 2, this is sometimes called the "hairy ball theorem".)
The Borsuk–Ulam theorem: any continuous map from the n-sphere to Euclidean n-space identifies at least one pair of antipodal points.
Any subgroup of a free group is free. This result is quite interesting, because the statement is purely algebraic yet the simplest known proof is topological. Namely, any free group G may be realized as the fundamental group of a graph X. The main theorem on covering spaces tells us that every subgroup H of G is the fundamental group of some covering space Y of X; but every such Y is again a graph. Therefore, its fundamental group H is free. On the other hand, this type of application is also handled more simply by the use of covering morphisms of groupoids, and that technique has yielded subgroup theorems not yet proved by methods of algebraic topology; see Higgins (1971).
Topological combinatorics.
Notable people[edit]

Frank Adams
Michael Atiyah
Enrico Betti
Armand Borel
Karol Borsuk
Raoul Bott
Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer
William Browder
Ronald Brown
Henri Cartan
Shiing-Shen Chern
Albrecht Dold
Charles Ehresmann
Samuel Eilenberg
Hans Freudenthal
Peter Freyd
Pierre Gabriel
Israel Gelfand
Alexander Grothendieck
Allen Hatcher
Friedrich Hirzebruch
Heinz Hopf
Michael J. Hopkins
Witold Hurewicz
Egbert van Kampen
Daniel Kan
Hermann Künneth
Ruth Lawrence
Solomon Lefschetz
Jean Leray
Saunders Mac Lane
Mark Mahowald
J. Peter May
Barry Mazur
John Milnor
John Coleman Moore
Jack Morava
Joseph Neisendorfer
Emmy Noether
Sergei Novikov
Grigori Perelman
Henri Poincaré
Lev Pontryagin
Nicolae Popescu
Mikhail Postnikov
Daniel Quillen
Jean-Pierre Serre
Isadore Singer
Stephen Smale
Edwin Spanier
Norman Steenrod
Dennis Sullivan
René Thom
Hiroshi Toda
Leopold Vietoris
Hassler Whitney
J. H. C. Whitehead
Gordon Thomas Whyburn
Important theorems[edit]

Blakers–Massey theorem
Borsuk–Ulam theorem
Brouwer fixed point theorem
Cellular approximation theorem
Dold–Thom theorem
Eilenberg–Ganea theorem
Eilenberg–Zilber theorem
Freudenthal suspension theorem
Hurewicz theorem
Künneth theorem
Lefschetz fixed-point theorem
Leray–Hirsch theorem
Poincaré duality theorem
Seifert–van Kampen theorem
Universal coefficient theorem
Whitehead theorem
See also[edit]

Algebraic K-theory
Exact sequence
Glossary of algebraic topology
Grothendieck topology
Higher category theory
Higher-dimensional algebra
Homological algebra
K-theory
Lie algebroid
Lie groupoid
Serre spectral sequence
Sheaf
Topological quantum field theory
Notes[edit]


^ Fraleigh (1976, p. 163)

^ Fréchet, Maurice; Fan, Ky (2012), Invitation to Combinatorial Topology, Courier Dover Publications, p. 101, ISBN 9780486147888.

^ Henle, Michael (1994), A Combinatorial Introduction to Topology, Courier Dover Publications, p. 221, ISBN 9780486679662.

^ Spreer, Jonathan (2011), Blowups, slicings and permutation groups in combinatorial topology, Logos Verlag Berlin GmbH, p. 23, ISBN 9783832529833.


References[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Algebraic topology.




Wikiquote has quotations related to Algebraic topology.

Allegretti, Dylan G. L. (2008), Simplicial Sets and van Kampen's Theorem (Discusses generalized versions of van Kampen's theorem applied to topological spaces and simplicial sets).
Bredon, Glen E. (1993), Topology and Geometry, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 139, Springer, ISBN 0-387-97926-3.
Brown, R. (2007), Higher dimensional group theory, archived from the original on 2016-05-14, retrieved 2022-08-17 (Gives a broad view of higher-dimensional van Kampen theorems involving multiple groupoids).
Brown, R.; Razak, A. (1984), "A van Kampen theorem for unions of non-connected spaces", Arch. Math., 42: 85–88, doi:10.1007/BF01198133, S2CID 122228464. "Gives a general theorem on the fundamental groupoid with a set of base points of a space which is the union of open sets."
Brown, R.; Hardie, K.; Kamps, H.; Porter, T. (2002), "The homotopy double groupoid of a Hausdorff space", Theory Appl. Categories, 10 (2): 71–93.
Brown, R.; Higgins, P.J. (1978), "On the connection between the second relative homotopy groups of some related spaces", Proc. London Math. Soc., S3-36 (2): 193–212, doi:10.1112/plms/s3-36.2.193. "The first 2-dimensional version of van Kampen's theorem."
Brown, Ronald; Higgins, Philip J.; Sivera, Rafael (2011), Nonabelian Algebraic Topology: Filtered Spaces, Crossed Complexes, Cubical Homotopy Groupoids, European Mathematical Society Tracts in Mathematics, vol. 15, European Mathematical Society, arXiv:math/0407275, ISBN 978-3-03719-083-8, archived from the original on 2009-06-04 This provides a homotopy theoretic approach to basic algebraic topology, without needing a basis in singular homology, or the method of simplicial approximation. It contains a lot of material on crossed modules.
Fraleigh, John B. (1976), A First Course In Abstract Algebra (2nd ed.), Reading: Addison-Wesley, ISBN 0-201-01984-1
Greenberg, Marvin J.; Harper, John R. (1981), Algebraic Topology: A First Course, Revised edition, Mathematics Lecture Note Series, Westview/Perseus, ISBN 9780805335576. A functorial, algebraic approach originally by Greenberg with geometric flavoring added by Harper.
Hatcher, Allen (2002), Algebraic Topology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-79540-0. A modern, geometrically flavoured introduction to algebraic topology.
Higgins, Philip J. (1971), Notes on categories and groupoids, Van Nostrand Reinhold, ISBN 9780442034061
Maunder, C. R. F. (1970), Algebraic Topology, London: Van Nostrand Reinhold, ISBN 0-486-69131-4.
tom Dieck, Tammo (2008), Algebraic Topology, EMS Textbooks in Mathematics, European Mathematical Society, ISBN 978-3-03719-048-7
van Kampen, Egbert (1933), "On the connection between the fundamental groups of some related spaces", American Journal of Mathematics, 55 (1): 261–7, JSTOR 51000091
Further reading[edit]
Hatcher, Allen (2002). Algebraic topology. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-79160-X. and ISBN 0-521-79540-0.
"Algebraic topology", Encyclopedia of Mathematics, EMS Press, 2001 [1994]
May JP (1999). A Concise Course in Algebraic Topology (PDF). University of Chicago Press. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09. Retrieved 2008-09-27. Section 2.7 provides a category-theoretic presentation of the theorem as a colimit in the category of groupoids.
vteTopologyFields
General (point-set)
Algebraic
Combinatorial
Continuum
Differential
Geometric
low-dimensional
Homology
cohomology
Set-theoretic
Digital
Key concepts
Open set / Closed set
Interior
Continuity
Space
compact
connected
Hausdorff
metric
uniform
Homotopy
homotopy group
fundamental group
Simplicial complex
CW complex
Polyhedral complex
Manifold
Bundle (mathematics)
Second-countable space
Cobordism
Metrics and properties
Euler characteristic
Betti number
Winding number
Chern number
Orientability
Key results
Banach fixed-point theorem
De Rham cohomology
Invariance of domain
Poincaré conjecture
Tychonoff's theorem
Urysohn's lemma

 Category
 Mathematics portal
 Wikibook
 Wikiversity
 Topics
general
algebraic
geometric
 Publications

Authority control databases: National 
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Algebraic_topology&oldid=1218767695"
Category: Algebraic topologyHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataCommons category link is on WikidataCS1: long volume valueArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiers






 This page was last edited on 13 April 2024, at 18:42 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view













Toggle limited content width







