














An Introduction to Ergodic Theory | SpringerLink






























Skip to main content



Advertisement











Log in







Menu




                            Find a journal
                        

                            Publish with us
                        

                            Track your research
                        






Search






Cart















Home





Textbook


















            An Introduction to Ergodic Theory
        

Textbook
© 1982


Latest edition











Overview

Authors:



Peter Walters






Peter Walters


View author publications

You can also search for this author in
                                    
PubMed
 
Google Scholar














Part of the book series:
Graduate Texts in Mathematics (GTM, volume 79)
                    








Buy print copy









Softcover Book  EUR 59.87 
 Price includes VAT (Poland) 



    

Compact, lightweight edition
Dispatched in 3 to 5 business days
Free shipping worldwide - see info
Buy Softcover Book 
       






Tax calculation will be finalised at checkout


 Licence this eBook for your library 



 Learn about institutional subscriptions 












About this book

                    This text provides an introduction to ergodic theory suitable for readers knowing basic measure theory. The mathematical prerequisites are summarized in Chapter 0. It is hoped the reader will be ready to tackle research papers after reading the book. The first part of the text is concerned with measure-preserving transformations of probability spaces; recurrence properties, mixing properties, the Birkhoff ergodic theorem, isomorphism and spectral isomorphism, and entropy theory are discussed. Some examples are described and are studied in detail when new properties are presented. The second part of the text focuses on the ergodic theory of continuous transformations of compact metrizable spaces. The family of invariant probability measures for such a transformation is studied and related to properties of the transformation such as topological traitivity, minimality, the size of the non-wandering set, and existence of periodic points. Topological entropy is introduced and related to measure-theoretic entropy. Topological pressure and equilibrium states are discussed, and a proof is given of the variational principle that relates pressure to measure-theoretic entropies. Several examples are studied in detail. The final chapter outlines significant results and some applications of ergodic theory to other branches of mathematics.
                


Bibliographic Information



Book Title: An Introduction to Ergodic Theory
Authors: Peter Walters
Series Title: 

Graduate Texts in Mathematics

Publisher: Springer New York, NY

eBook Packages: 

Springer Book Archive



Copyright Information: Springer-Verlag New York, Inc. 1982
Softcover ISBN: 978-0-387-95152-2Published: 06 October 2000
Series ISSN: 
 0072-5285 
Series E-ISSN: 
 2197-5612 
Edition Number: 1
Number of Pages: IX, 250





Publish with us


Policies and ethics








Back to top









Buy print copy









Softcover Book  EUR 59.87 
 Price includes VAT (Poland) 



    

Compact, lightweight edition
Dispatched in 3 to 5 business days
Free shipping worldwide - see info
Buy Softcover Book 
       






Tax calculation will be finalised at checkout


 Licence this eBook for your library 



 Learn about institutional subscriptions 
























Search



Search by keyword or author






Search







Navigation



                        Find a journal
                    



                        Publish with us
                    



                        Track your research
                    








Discover content

Journals A-Z
Books A-Z



Publish with us

Publish your research
Open access publishing



Products and services

Our products
Librarians
Societies
Partners and advertisers



Our imprints

Springer
Nature Portfolio
BMC
Palgrave Macmillan
Apress








Your privacy choices/Manage cookies


Your US state privacy rights


Accessibility statement


Terms and conditions


Privacy policy


Help and support





149.156.52.13

Polish Consortium ICM University of Warsaw (3000169041)  - Polish Consortium ICM University of Warsaw (3003616166)  - Pedagogical University of Cracow (1000857903) 




© 2024 Springer Nature









