



Application of Statistics in Real Life | Overview & Examples - Lesson | Study.com














































for Teachers
for Schools
for Working Scholars®
for College Credit


























Log In


Sign Up

Menu
					










									Plans
							



									Subjects
							





Art


Business


Computer Science


Education & Teaching


English


Health & Medicine


History


Humanities


Math


Psychology


Science


Social Science







							 
						



									Art
							



									Architecture 




									Art History 




									Design 




									Performing Arts 




									Visual Arts 






							 
						



									Business
							



									Accounting 




									Business Administration 




									Business Communication 




									Business Ethics 




									Business Intelligence 




									Business Law 




									Economics 




									Finance 




									Healthcare Administration 




									Human Resources 




									Information Technology 




									International Business 




									Operations Management 




									Real Estate 




									Sales & Marketing 






							 
						



									Computer Science
							



									Computer Engineering 




									Computer Programming 




									Cybersecurity 




									Data Science 




									Software 






							 
						



									Education & Teaching
							



									Education Law & Policy 




									Pedagogy & Teaching Strategies 




									Special & Specialized Education 




									Student Support in Education 




									Teaching English Language Learners 






							 
						



									English
							



									Grammar 




									Literature 




									Public Speaking 




									Reading 




									Vocabulary 




									Writing & Composition 






							 
						



									Health & Medicine
							



									Counseling & Therapy 




									Health 




									Medicine 




									Nursing 




									Nutrition 






							 
						



									History
							



									US History 




									World History 






							 
						



									Humanities
							



									Communication 




									Ethics 




									Foreign Languages 




									Philosophy 




									Religious Studies 






							 
						



									Math
							



									Algebra 




									Basic Math 




									Calculus 




									Geometry 




									Statistics 




									Trigonometry 






							 
						



									Psychology
							



									Clinical & Abnormal Psychology 




									Cognitive Science 




									Developmental Psychology 




									Educational Psychology 




									Organizational Psychology 




									Social Psychology 






							 
						



									Science
							



									Anatomy & Physiology 




									Astronomy 




									Biology 




									Chemistry 




									Earth Science 




									Engineering 




									Environmental Science 




									Physics 






							 
						



									Social Science
							



									Anthropology 




									Criminal Justice 




									Geography 




									Law 




									Linguistics 




									Political Science 




									Sociology 







									Courses
							





By Subject


By Education Level


Adult Education


Transferable Credit







							By Subject
						



									Arts 




									Business 




									Computer Science 




									Education & Teaching 




									English (ELA) 




									Foreign Language 




									Health & Medicine 




									History 




									Humanities 




									Math 




									Psychology 




									Science 




									Social Science 






							By Education Level
						



									Elementary School 




									Middle School 




									High School 




									College 




									Graduate and Post-Grad 







									Test Prep
							





Teacher Certification Exams


Nursing Exams


Allied Health & Medicine Exams


Real Estate Exams


All Test Prep







							 
						



									Teacher Certification Exams
							



									Praxis 




									FTCE 




									TExES 




									CSET & CBEST 




									More Teacher Certification Test Prep 






							 
						



									Nursing Exams
							



									NCLEX 




									HESI 




									More Nursing Test Prep 






							 
						



									Allied Health & Medicine Exams
							



									ASCP 




									CNA 




									CNS 




									More Medical Test Prep 






							 
						



									Real Estate Exams
							



									Real Estate Sales 




									Real Estate Brokers 




									Real Estate Appraisals 







									Teach
							





Teaching Resources and Curriculum


Skills Practice


Lesson Plans


Teacher Certification


Teacher Professional Development








									Tutoring
							





Math Tutoring


Science Tutoring


Business Tutoring


Humanities Tutoring







							 
						



									Math Tutoring
							



									Algebra  Tutoring




									Calculus  Tutoring




									Geometry  Tutoring




									Pre-calculus  Tutoring




									Statistics  Tutoring




									Trigonometry  Tutoring






							 
						



									Science Tutoring
							



									Biology  Tutoring




									Chemistry  Tutoring




									Physics  Tutoring






							 
						



									Business Tutoring
							



									Accounting  Tutoring




									Economics  Tutoring




									Finance  Tutoring






							 
						



									Humanities Tutoring
							



									History  Tutoring




									Literature  Tutoring




									Writing  Tutoring






Sign Up

























Copyright










 Math Courses
			
			/
			
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	

	
	
	
		
		
		
		
		
			
Contemporary Math: Help and Review
Course




		Application of Statistics in Real Life | Overview & Examples
	






Lesson



						
							
							
								Transcript
							
						
					




					Dan Brioli, Beverly Maitland-Frett, Jerry Allison
			


Author

Dan Brioli
Dan has a B.A. in economics from the University of Pittsburgh and an A.A.S. in computer programming from the Pittsburgh Technical Institute. He has trained others in STEM topics and authored technical documentation throughout his career.

					View bio
				


Instructor

Beverly Maitland-Frett
Beverly has taught mathematics at the high school level and has a doctorate in teaching and learning.

					View bio
				


Expert Contributor

Jerry Allison
Jerry holds a Doctor of Business Administration and a Master’s in Mathematics.  He has taught business, math, and accounting for over 25 years.

					View bio
				



							Learn what statistics are used for. Study applications of statistics, identify jobs that use statistics in everyday life, and see statistics examples in real life.
						
								
									Updated: 11/21/2023
								







			FAQs
		

			Activities
		




Application of Statistics in Daily Life
Discovery Project
Watch the weather forecast today?  What statistics are given in the forecast?  Is there a chance of rain or snow given in the forecast?  Does the weather person tell what the average temperature is for the day?  These are all statistics or based on statistics.  What is the forecast for the next week?  This is all based on statistics and what is called inferential statistics, statistics used to predict values.  Make a list of all the statistics you hear or see from the weather forecast.

Research Project
Use an Internet search engine to research the concepts of mean, median, and mode.  During your research, determine when and why each of these is used.  Is one of these used more frequently than others?  Which do you think is the easiest to calculate?  Now let's apply it.  Suppose you have a gerbil that ate 10 food pellets on Sunday, 12 on Monday, 9 on Tuesday, and 10 on Wednesday.  You would like to approximate how many pellets the gerbil will eat on Thursday.  Would you use the mean, median, or mode to decide?  Why did you pick this method?

Discussion Question
Economists often use a median to describe housing prices or wages in an area.  For example, the median wage in Bigtown is $50,000 meaning half the people in Bigtown earn less than $50,000 and half of the people earn more than $50,000.  Why do you think that the median is used?  Why is the mean not used?  Why is the mode not used?





What are some examples of statistics?

Statistics can be used in real life to plan budgets, determine the best routes to travel, find the best prices for products bought and sold, and the best times to perform various daily activities.



What are the application of statistics in various fields?

Statistics are used in business to detect market trends and sales results, in education to determine teaching method effectiveness, in government to detect changes in population demographics and effectiveness of public policy, and in sports to examine player and team successes and capabilities.













		Create an account
		




Table of ContentsWhat Are Applications of Statistics? Statistics Examples in Real-Life Careers Statistics in Everyday Life Lesson SummaryShow 






What Are Applications of Statistics?



Statistics is often seen as the domain of big business, especially in the age of the internet, big data, and machine learning algorithms. Statistics helps us gauge uncertainty and make plans when given incomplete information by collecting a sample of information and deriving further information from that data.

A screenshot of Google search results.






The application of statistics is done on large scales with massive budgets and strict adherence to the scientific method and can be found across all industries, government organizations, and academia. Education administrators, governmental offices and officials, business leaders and marketing departments, and scientific researchers all use statistical methods and processes during their work.But it can also be applied to the real world and day-to-day activities of people going about their daily lives, too. Every day, people are confronted with incomplete information and try to figure things out based on that information. It could be what route to take to work, how much to charge for a product they're selling, how long a certain activity will take, or how much they should pay for something in a store or online.Once they've decided on what they are trying to find out and how they will discover that information, steps are taken to collect and organize the data in a structure that can be examined more easily and interpreted to conclude what has been found. They might even use this data and their conclusions to convince others of their position on the topic.So, what are statistics used for in everyday life and in people's careers, and what are some examples of its use? It helps to understand the process behind the statistical process and some definitions of important concepts in the field first.Planning a StudyThe first step in any statistical examination is asking a question like, "What time should I leave for work in order to minimize my travel time?" This is the most important part, as knowing what needs to be discovered informs all other parts of the statistical process. Once the question is known, the researcher needs to plan the steps they will take to collect their data and what tools will be best used for the process.
Organizing the DataOrganizing data might be as simple as noting values down on a piece of paper for less formal types of statistical analysis. However, in large organizations or when working with large data sets, the software is used to manipulate and structure the data somehow, whether simple spreadsheet software or complicated mathematical algorithms developed for niche purposes in various industries.Interpreting the DataOnce data has been collected and organized, interpretations need to be made based on the data. Is it the best day to have a sale on a weekend when traffic is already high or is it on a weekday to encourage people to visit a business during slower times?Presenting the DataFinally, the ways in which data and findings based on data are presented have a massive effect on how people feel about the interpretations. In many academic fields, findings are presented dry and formal. Still, the marketing department of a business might develop flashy infographics to persuade more people of their arguments.Mean, Median, and ModeMeans, medians, and modes are everywhere in statistics and are the fundamental pieces of information derived from data that help inform researchers of the structure of the data itself. Consider the following table of values:


Observation
Value




1
2


2
3


3
3


4
5


5
8


6
11


7
14


The mean is the average of the data's values, calculated by taking the sum of all the values and dividing by the total number of observations. From the data in the table, the total of the values is 46 and dividing that by 7 gives a mean (or average) of 6.57.The median is whatever value is represented by the center-most piece of data when the data has been ordered in some way. The data in the table are ordered in ascending order, and the center-most observation is the 4th value, so the median is 5. In data sets with even numbers of observations, the average of the central observations is used.The mode is whatever value occurs most often in a set of data. The most common observation in the table, with two total observations, is 3. The mode of this data set is 3.The larger the collection of data, the more reliable it is to conclude it. A sample of five people out of a hundred might give a hint of a trend in the total population, but it would be much less reliable to make a statement about that population using that data than if the total number of people sampled was fifty.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account






































































An error occurred trying to load this video.
Try refreshing the page, or contact customer support.





You must cCreate an account to continue watching




Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?


				I am a student
			

 I am a teacher
			




							 Create Your Account To Continue Watching
As a member, you'll also get unlimited access to over 88,000
						lessons in math, English, science, history, and more. Plus, get practice tests, quizzes, and personalized coaching to help you
						succeed.

						Get unlimited access to over 88,000 lessons.
					























    
    
		Try it now
	




							
								 
								 
									  



















	
	
		It only takes a few minutes to setup and you can cancel any time.
	
	


								 
							
                        

Already registered? Log in here for
						access

 Back
					


Resources created by teachers for teachers
Over 30,000 video lessons
		& teaching resources‐all
		in one place.
	






Video lessons





Quizzes & Worksheets





Classroom Integration





Lesson Plans



I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues. It’s like a teacher waved a magic wand and did the work for me. I feel like it’s a lifeline.



			Jennifer B.
		

				Teacher
				
				
			

































    
    
		Try it now
	




 Back
	











Coming up next:
					Mathematical Sets: Elements, Intersections & Unions
			

You're on a roll. Keep up the good work!


						Take Quiz
					

Watch Next Lesson



 Replay
		






Just checking in. Are you still watching?
Yes! Keep playing. 





	Your next lesson will play in
	10 seconds
	
















                        0:04 Definition of Statistics


                        1:05 Statistical Process Stages


                        2:40 Applications of Statistics


                        4:18 Three Statistical Measures


                        5:44 Common Concerns about…


                        6:34 Lesson Summary






View Video Only

 Save


 Timeline
				

413K views








									Video
							



									Quiz
								



									Course
								



									Video Only
								



						














	
	
							413K
							views







Statistics Examples in Real-Life Careers





Atlanta Falcons training camp during a training event.








Sports is often a go-to example of data collection and statistical analysis. Watch any professional sports game, and the hosts will continually reference various statistics like how often teams play against each other and their normal results, how many goals are scored by players, and how often certain players are on the field.
Government agencies regularly perform censuses to discover trends in populations and collect economic data to determine the outcome of policy decisions.
Statistics are often used in medicine not just for studies used to determine the efficacy of drugs and procedures, but also to detect problems in patients based on baseline health statistics in the population or the patient's demographic, and to study natural phenomena like how diseases spread among populations.
Businesses collect and process large amounts of data to determine the effects of prices and sale events, how much market penetration they have, and the likely state of their market in coming business quarters and years.
The field of education and academia in general use statistics to determine the effectiveness of teaching methods and school policies, as well.







								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account















Statistics in Everyday Life



What are statistics used for? Statistics in everyday life can be used to estimate budgets for households. Knowing average fuel, food, and entertainment costs help prepare a person for the likely expenses they will have next month or the month after that, and these numbers can be found by averaging the values found on previous bills and receipts.
Or consider planning on where to eat dinner. Restaurant A isn't the best food, but they produce it quickly, affordably, and there is never any wait when someone walks in the door. Restaurant B is much nicer, however, but it's more expensive, and sometimes there is quite a long wait. Which restaurant should a customer go to? The answer will be different for everyone, but knowing the wait time trends, quality, and cost go a long way toward informing someone of where to go for dinner.But beyond the application of statistics in everyday life, understanding the basics of statistics is important to interpret events in the news and various pieces of data presented to argue points about public policy. Understanding that research can be cherry-picked to color a debate while being able to find other research that presents contrary evidence is an important skill in being a more informed and more discerning consumer of news and media, and knowing about sample sizes helps when determining whether something is just a fluke or if it might be a very reliable piece of information.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Lesson Summary



Statistics helps us gauge uncertainty and make plans when given incomplete information by collecting a sample of information and deriving further information from that data. The primary steps for statistical analysis are planning a study, organizing the data, interpreting the data, and presenting the data. The mean is the average of a set of values, the median is the value of the center-most value in an ordered set, and the mode is the value that occurs the most often in a set.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account










														Video Transcript
														
													



Definition of StatisticsTimmy is a pizza shop manager and he has two locations picked for a possible new location. He decides to conduct a mini-study to decide based on a variety of factors. Location A is smaller, and he notices that there is a high school two blocks away, some business offices close by, and a laundromat next door. Location B is larger and next to a supermarket with some business offices scattered around the area, amidst several vacant lots. If you were Timmy, which would you choose? You are a statistician in many ways. Statistics is the method of conducting a study about a particular topic by collecting, organizing, interpreting, and finally presenting data. Being a statistician at an elementary level may simply mean noticing patterns in daily circumstances and drawing conclusions about those patterns. On a grander scale, statisticians may spend months or years conducting a study before they can produce meaningful analysis of information. Statistics is its own community, with rules, procedures, and policies all built on simple mathematical principles. 
Stages in the Statistical ProcessThe statistical process guides genuine study, and statisticians are exacting in their methodologies. The major steps of statistics are explained in a simplistic form as follows: 
Planning a study: There must be a subject that requires investigation. Planning entails deciding what instruments (interviews, surveys, etc.) to use, who to speak with, and how to analyze findings. Instruments, in this case, are tools used in conducting a study like surveys, interviews, etc. Do you remember Timmy? In this stage, he plans to interview shoppers and count people. 
Organizing the data: The best way to obtain the valid answers is to organize the information effectively to help expose patterns and other significant relationships. There are a variety of software programs that can help with this step. Once Timmy has gathered data, he could perform calculations of the mean, mode, and median visitors. 
Interpreting the data: This is the heartbeat of statistics. Interpretations can have lasting repercussions, and it's important to make sure they are valid assumptions and supported by mathematical reasoning. Timmy, based on his interpretations of the numbers, could make plans to have special sales on days with the most traffic. 
Presenting the data: The methods you chose to present the data can make findings more interesting or powerful. People use graphs, tables, and various diagrams to show relationships between data. With this information, Timmy could present compelling arguments using his analysis so that he and his business partners can discuss the most profitable possibilities for the pizza shop. 
Applications of StatisticsOther than individuals and small businesses owners like Timmy who conducted their own studies, there are some entities who thrive on statistics. Here are a few major examples. Government AgenciesThe government uses statistics to make decisions about populations, health, education, etc. It may conduct research on education to check the progress of high schools students using a specific curriculum or collect characteristic information about the population using a census. Science and MedicineThe medical field would be far less effective without research to see which medicines or interventions work best and how the human bodies react to treatment. Medical professionals also perform studies by race, age, or nationality to see the effect of these characteristics on health. PsychologyAlthough this is attached to both the science and medical field, success in psychology would be impossible without the systematic study of human behavior, often analyzing results statistically. EducationTeachers are encouraged to be researchers in their classrooms, to see what teaching methods work on which students and understand why. They also should evaluate test items to determine if students are performing in a statistically expected way. At all levels of education and testing there are statistical reports about student performance, from kindergarten to an SAT or GRE. Large CompaniesEvery large company employs its own statistical research divisions or firms to research issues related to products, employees, customer service, etc. Business success relies on knowing what is working and what isn't. Three Major Statistical MeasuresIn many cases, basic statistical analysis can be done by using three main concepts: the mean, the median, and the mode. MeanThe mean is the mathematical average. For example, a laundromat may conduct a study to see how many people use a machine each day, then calculate the average for each week. 
Sun: 105 
Mon: 50 
Tues: 40 
Wed: 50 
Thurs: 70 
Fri: 80 
Sat: 95 
The mean is the sum of the items divided by the number of items. In this case, we have seven items, so: mean = (105 + 50 + 40 + 50 + 70 + 80 + 95) / 7 = 70 people ModeThe mode is the number that occurs most frequently in the data set. If we first organize the data in ascending order we get: 40, 50, 50, 70, 80, 95, 105. You can see 50 is the mode because it occurs twice while every other number occurs just once. 


MedianThe median is found by organizing the data and then taking note of the number(s) that is in the middle. If we consider our data set again (40, 50, 50, 70, 80, 95, 105), you can see 70 is the number in the middle. In data sets with an odd number of items, you simply select the middle item. In data sets with an even number of items, you must average the value of the two middle items to find the median. Common Concerns about StatisticsSome of the main concerns with statistics are: Data interpretation: Many people can interpret the same data differently. For example, if a report explains that 80% of high school students are left handed, it is easy to think that teenagers these days are mostly left handed. However, if you find that this is based on a population of students at Left Handed High, your opinion would change. When reading statistics, it is important to ask: what data was really captured and how was it interpreted? Data validity?: Validity is a common term in the statistics world and it refers to whether the study is true or false. A study could be inaccurate, for example, if researchers pressured participants to answer a certain way. All factors must be representative of the real world to create a valid study. Lesson SummaryStatistical studies are extremely important in our everyday life. Statistics are the method of conducting a study about a particular topic by collecting, organizing, interpreting, and finally presenting data. Every human, at some level, is a statistician. We observe trends, sort out information, and then draw conclusions. This is similar to the actual process of gathering statistics, which begins with planning a study, which involves deciding what instruments to use, who to speak with, and how to analyze findings. Instruments are tools used in conducting a study like surveys, etc. From there, you collect data, when the instruments you selected are used, organize the data, putting the information together effectively to help expose patterns and other significant relationships. Interpret the data, valid assumptions supported by mathematical reasoning and finally, present the data, graphs, tables, and various diagrams are used to show relationships between data. The mean, median and mode, the average, The middle-valued number(s), and the most common number, respectively are all calculated during the organization process, while validity, whether the study is true or false, is a common concern that is analyzed during the entire process. Many major entities do more advanced and larger statistical analysis. Some major areas relying on statistics include government, education, science, and large companies. By doing more and better statistical analysis, we are able to understand the world around us, appreciate the value of analysis, and we are less deceived by numbers. Key Terms





Statistics - the method of conducting a study about a particular topic by collecting, organizing, interpreting, and finally presenting data Instruments - tools used in conducting a study like surveys, interviews, etc. Mean - the mathematical average of a set of data Mode - the number that occurs most frequently in the data set Median - the middle number of an ordered data set Validity - whether the study is true or false Learning OutcomesAfter viewing this lesson, you should be able to: 
Restate various fields in which statistics are used 
Report the major steps of statistics 
Calculate the mean, mode, and median of a set of data 
Recognize how you adapt statistical instruments to everyday scenarios







			
				
				
					To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
				
			
			
			
Create your account













Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?


				I am a student
			

 I am a teacher
			



Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 30 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In

 Back
					


Resources created by teachers for teachers
Over 30,000 video lessons
		& teaching resources‐all
		in one place.
	






Video lessons





Quizzes & Worksheets





Classroom Integration





Lesson Plans



I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues. It’s like a teacher waved a magic wand and did the work for me. I feel like it’s a lifeline.



			Jennifer B.
		

				Teacher
				
				
			

































    
    
		Try it now
	




 Back
	







Recommended Lessons and Courses for You


Related Lessons


Related Courses








									Recommended Lessons for You
								

















Statistics, Data Analysis & Probability in Real Life
                            
                        












Constructing Equilateral Triangles, Squares, and Regular Hexagons Inscribed in Circles
                            
                        












Misleading Statistics | Definition & Examples
                            
                        












Unit Fraction | Definition, Form & Examples
                            
                        














Ronald Fisher | Biography, Publication & Accomplishments
                            
                        












Business Statistics Definition, Uses & Importance
                            
                        












Teaching Statistics & Probability Using Models, Materials & Technologies
                            
                        












Measures of Correlation in Business & Finance: Uses & Examples
                            
                        














Frequency Distribution in Statistics | Definition & Examples
                            
                        












Decile | Definition, Formula & Calculation
                            
                        












Difference Between Grouped and Ungrouped Data
                            
                        












Time Series Analysis | Application, Methods & Examples
                            
                        














Bivariate Distribution | Definition, Formula & Examples
                            
                        












Central Tendency | Overview, Measures & Examples
                            
                        












Normal Distribution | Curve, Table & Examples
                            
                        












Parameter vs. Statistic | Definition, Differences & Example
                            
                        














Discrete Probability Distribution | Definition & Examples
                            
                        












Ogive | Definition, Graph & Examples
                            
                        












Probability Theory in Decision-Making, Marketing & Business
                            
                        












Beta Distribution | Definition & Examples
                            
                        

























									Related Courses
								

















Developmental College Statistics
                            
                        












Holt McDougal Algebra 2: Online Textbook Help
                            
                        












Prentice Hall Algebra 2: Online Textbook Help
                            
                        












Glencoe Algebra 1: Online Textbook Help
                            
                        














Remedial Contemporary Math
                            
                        












Common Entrance Test (CET): Study Guide & Syllabus
                            
                        












Common Admission Test (CAT): Study Guide & Test Prep
                            
                        












Math 104: Calculus
                            
                        














GED Math: Quantitative, Arithmetic & Algebraic Problem Solving
                            
                        












ELM: CSU Math Study Guide
                            
                        












Study.com SAT Test Prep: Practice & Study Guide
                            
                        












Math Review for Teachers: Study Guide & Help
                            
                        














SAT Subject Test Mathematics Level 1: Practice and Study Guide
                            
                        












SAT Subject Test Mathematics Level 2: Practice and Study Guide
                            
                        












TExES Mathematics 7-12 (235) Prep
                            
                        












CSET Math Subtest I (211) Prep
                            
                        














CSET Math Subtest II (212) Prep
                            
                        












CSET Math Subtest III (213) Prep
                            
                        












Supplemental Math: Study Aid
                            
                        












CLEP College Mathematics Prep
                            
                        






























		Start today. Try it now
		




Table of ContentsWhat Are Applications of Statistics? Statistics Examples in Real-Life Careers Statistics in Everyday Life Lesson SummaryShow 






Contemporary Math: Help and Review


20 chapters |
				
					
					
						221 lessons
						
					
				
			






Ch 1. 
									
										Mathematical Reasoning &...










Ch 2. 
              Statistics Overview: Help and Review






							Descriptive vs. Inferential Statistics | Definition & Examples
					

							  










5:11
						 



							Population vs Sample in Statistics | Differences & Examples
					

							  










3:24
						 



							Random Sampling Definition, Types & Examples
					

							  










5:55
						 



							Simple Random Sampling in Statistics | Definition & Examples
					

							  










5:10
						 



							Stratified Random Sampling | Definition, Method & Characteristics
					

							  










6:25
						 



							Cluster Sampling | Definition, Types & Examples
					

							  










6:44
						 



							Systematic Random Sampling | Definition, Formula & Examples
					

							  










8:37
						 



							Measures of Central Tendency | Definition, Formula & Examples
					

							  










8:30
						 



							Calculating the Mean, Median, Mode & Range: Practice Problems
					

							  










7:13
						 



							Population Variance | Definition, Formula & Calculation
					

							  










9:34
						 



							Standard Deviation Equation, Formula & Examples
					

							  










13:05
						 



							Outliers in a Data Set | Minimums & Maximums
					

							  










4:40
						 



							Quartiles & Interquartile Range | Calculation & Examples
					

							  










8:00
						 



							Finding the Percentile of a Data Set | Formula & Example
					

							  










8:25
						 



							Relative Frequency | Definition & Examples
					

							  










4:48
						 



							Cumulative Frequency | Definition, Table & Example
					

							  










5:17
						 



							Cumulative & Relative Frequency | Formula, Table & Calculations
					

							  










5:47
						 



							Creating & Interpreting Histograms: Process & Examples
					

							  










5:43
						 



							Degrees of Freedom Formula, Uses & Examples
					

							  










5:12
						 



							Restriction of Range: Definition & Examples
					

							  










4:09
						 



							Linear Regression | Definition, Formula & Example
					



							Misleading Graphs | Overview & Examples
					

							  










3:46
						 



							Misleading Statistics | Definition & Examples
					

							  










4:39
						 



							Poission Distribution Overview, Formula & Examples
					

							  










4:26
						 



							Population Variance | Definition, Formula & Examples
					



							Sample Variance | Formula, Symbol & Examples
					



							Data Distribution | Definition & Types
					

							  










4:21
						 



							Application of Statistics in Real Life | Overview & Examples
					

							  










8:11
						 








Ch 3. 
									
										Probability Overview: Help and...










Ch 4. 
									
										Understanding Discrete Probability...










Ch 5. 
									
										The Normal Curve & Continuous...










Ch 6. 
									
										The Mathematics of Voting: Help and...










Ch 7. 
									
										The Mathematics of Apportionment: Help...










Ch 8. 
									
										Graph Theory: Help and Review










Ch 9. 
									
										Operations with Basic Algebraic...










Ch 10. 
									
										Conics in Algebra










Ch 11. 
									
										Algebraic Concepts of Groups &...










Ch 12. 
									
										Notation, Sequences & Series










Ch 13. 
									
										Matrices and Determinants in...










Ch 14. 
									
										Combinatorics










Ch 15. 
									
										Fractions, Decimals & Mixed...










Ch 16. 
									
										Approaches to Math Word Problems










Ch 17. 
									
										How to Solve Word Problems: Help and...










Ch 18. 
									
										Performing Basic Arithmetic










Ch 19. 
									
										Operations with Monomials and...










Ch 20. 
									
										Number Line & the Coordinate...












Application of Statistics in Real Life | Overview & Examples Related Study Materials








				Related Lessons
			

















Statistics, Data Analysis & Probability in Real Life
                            
                        












Constructing Equilateral Triangles, Squares, and Regular Hexagons Inscribed in Circles
                            
                        












Misleading Statistics | Definition & Examples
                            
                        












Unit Fraction | Definition, Form & Examples
                            
                        














Ronald Fisher | Biography, Publication & Accomplishments
                            
                        












Business Statistics Definition, Uses & Importance
                            
                        












Teaching Statistics & Probability Using Models, Materials & Technologies
                            
                        












Measures of Correlation in Business & Finance: Uses & Examples
                            
                        














Frequency Distribution in Statistics | Definition & Examples
                            
                        












Decile | Definition, Formula & Calculation
                            
                        












Difference Between Grouped and Ungrouped Data
                            
                        












Time Series Analysis | Application, Methods & Examples
                            
                        














Bivariate Distribution | Definition, Formula & Examples
                            
                        












Central Tendency | Overview, Measures & Examples
                            
                        












Normal Distribution | Curve, Table & Examples
                            
                        












Parameter vs. Statistic | Definition, Differences & Example
                            
                        














Discrete Probability Distribution | Definition & Examples
                            
                        












Ogive | Definition, Graph & Examples
                            
                        












Probability Theory in Decision-Making, Marketing & Business
                            
                        












Beta Distribution | Definition & Examples
                            
                        

























				Related Courses
			

















Developmental College Statistics
                            
                        












Holt McDougal Algebra 2: Online Textbook Help
                            
                        












Prentice Hall Algebra 2: Online Textbook Help
                            
                        












Glencoe Algebra 1: Online Textbook Help
                            
                        














Remedial Contemporary Math
                            
                        












Common Entrance Test (CET): Study Guide & Syllabus
                            
                        












Common Admission Test (CAT): Study Guide & Test Prep
                            
                        












Math 104: Calculus
                            
                        














GED Math: Quantitative, Arithmetic & Algebraic Problem Solving
                            
                        












ELM: CSU Math Study Guide
                            
                        












Study.com SAT Test Prep: Practice & Study Guide
                            
                        












Math Review for Teachers: Study Guide & Help
                            
                        














SAT Subject Test Mathematics Level 1: Practice and Study Guide
                            
                        












SAT Subject Test Mathematics Level 2: Practice and Study Guide
                            
                        












TExES Mathematics 7-12 (235) Prep
                            
                        












CSET Math Subtest I (211) Prep
                            
                        














CSET Math Subtest II (212) Prep
                            
                        












CSET Math Subtest III (213) Prep
                            
                        












Supplemental Math: Study Aid
                            
                        












CLEP College Mathematics Prep
                            
                        



























Related Topics






Browse by Courses
Statistics 101 Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
Remedial Algebra
College Mathematics for Teachers: Professional Development
Precalculus Algebra for Teachers: Professional Development
Precalculus for Teachers: Professional Development
Remedial Contemporary Math
College Algebra Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
College Mathematics Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
College Precalculus Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
Calculus Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
Trigonometry Curriculum Resource & Lesson Plans
Algebra I Curriculum Resource & Lesson Plans
Algebra II Curriculum Resource & Lesson Plans
UExcel Calculus: Study Guide & Test Prep
Statistics for Teachers: Professional Development






Browse by Lessons
Statistical Analysis: Using Data to Find Trends and Examine Relationships
Analyzing, Applying, and Drawing Conclusions From Research to Make Recommendations
Statistical Analysis | Overview, Methods & Examples
Statistical Analysis | Definition, Types & Purpose
Proportional Relationships in Multistep Ratio & Percent Problems
Statistics: Lesson for Kids
Using Common Math Procedures
Interpreting Data & Statistics in a Passage
Understanding & Presenting Research in Social Science
Summarizing & Organizing Social Studies Research Data
Evaluating Random Processes in Statistical Experiments
Chi-Square Test of Independence: Example & Formula
Solving Two-Step Inequalities with Fractions | Steps & Examples
Solving Systems of Equations Using Matrices
Independent System of Equations | Formula & Examples














				Create an account to start this course today
			

						  
							  Used by over 30 million students worldwide
						  
						  
                


				  Create an account
		













Like this lesson



Share




Explore our library of over 88,000 lessons


Search











Browse


						Browse by subject
					


College Courses

Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses



High School Courses

AP
Common Core
GED

High School
See All High School Courses



Other Courses

College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses













Upgrade to enroll
×


Upgrade to Premium to enroll in Contemporary Math: Help and Review
Enrolling in a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams.




Track course progress




Take quizzes and exams




Earn certificates of completion



			You will also be able to:
			
Create a Goal
Create custom courses
Get your questions answered




Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!

			Upgrade Now
		
Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!











Download the app




























Plans

Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars® Solutions



About Us

Blog
Careers
Teach For Us
Press Center
Ambassador
Scholarships





Support

FAQ
Site Feedback



Download the app
























Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community








©  Copyright 2024 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		





Terms of Use  
Privacy Policy  
DMCA Notice  
ADA Compliance  
Honor Code For Students


















×








