



Category theory - Wikipedia




































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Create account

Log in








Personal tools





 Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Categories, objects, and morphisms




Toggle Categories, objects, and morphisms subsection





1.1
Categories








1.2
Morphisms










2
Functors








3
Natural transformations








4
Other concepts




Toggle Other concepts subsection





4.1
Universal constructions, limits, and colimits








4.2
Equivalent categories








4.3
Further concepts and results








4.4
Higher-dimensional categories










5
Historical notes








6
See also








7
Notes








8
References




Toggle References subsection





8.1
Citations








8.2
Sources










9
Further reading








10
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Category theory



49 languages




العربيةAsturianuবাংলাБългарскиCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어ՀայերենHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתქართულიLatinaMagyarBahasa Melayuမြန်မာဘာသာNederlands日本語PolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng Việt粵語中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikibooksWikiquoteWikiversity





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


General theory of mathematical structures
This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (November 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Schematic representation of a category with objects X, Y, Z and morphisms f, g, g ∘ f. (The category's three identity morphisms 1X, 1Y and 1Z, if explicitly represented, would appear as three arrows, from the letters X, Y, and Z to themselves, respectively.)
Category theory is a general theory of mathematical structures and their relations that was introduced by Samuel Eilenberg and Saunders Mac Lane in the middle of the 20th century in their foundational work on algebraic topology.[1] Category theory is used in almost all areas of mathematics. In particular, many constructions of new mathematical objects from previous ones that appear similarly in several contexts are conveniently expressed and unified in terms of categories. Examples include quotient spaces, direct products, completion, and duality.
Many areas of computer science also rely on category theory, such as functional programming and  semantics.
A category is formed by two sorts of objects: the objects of the category, and the morphisms, which relate two objects called the source and the target of the morphism. One often says that a morphism is an arrow that maps its source to its target. Morphisms can be composed if the target of the first morphism equals the source of the second one, and morphism composition has similar properties as function composition (associativity and existence of an identity morphisms for each object). Morphisms are often some sort of function, but this is not always the case. For example, a monoid may be viewed as a category with a single object, whose morphisms are the elements of the monoid.
The second fundamental concept of category theory is the concept of a functor, which plays the role of a morphism between two categories C1 and C2: it maps objects of C1 to objects of C2 and morphisms of C1 to morphisms of C2 in such a way that sources are mapped to sources, and targets are mapped to targets (or, in the case of a contravariant functor, sources are mapped to targets and vice-versa). A third fundamental concept is a natural transformation that may be viewed as a morphism of functors.


Categories, objects, and morphisms[edit]
Main articles: Category (mathematics) and Morphism
Categories[edit]
A category C consists of the following three mathematical entities:

A class ob(C), whose elements are called objects;
A class hom(C), whose elements are called morphisms or maps or arrows. Each morphism f has a source object a and target object b. The expression f : a → b, would be verbally stated as "f is a morphism from a to b".The expression hom(a, b) – alternatively expressed as homC(a, b), mor(a, b), or C(a, b) – denotes the hom-class of all morphisms from a to b.
A binary operation ∘, called composition of morphisms, such that  for any three objects a, b, and c, we have
∘ : hom(b, c) × hom(a, b) → hom(a, c).
The composition of f : a → b and g : b → c is written as g ∘ f or gf,[a] governed by two axioms:
1. Associativity: If f : a → b, g : b → c, and h : c → d then
h ∘  (g ∘ f) = (h ∘ g) ∘ f
2. Identity: For every object x, there exists a morphism 1x : x → x (also denoted as idx) called the identity morphism for x, such that
for every morphism f : a → b, we have
1b ∘ f = f = f ∘ 1a
From the axioms, it can be proved that there is exactly one identity morphism for every object.
Morphisms[edit]
Relations among morphisms (such as fg = h) are often depicted using commutative diagrams, with "points" (corners) representing objects and "arrows" representing morphisms.
Morphisms can have any of the following properties. A morphism f : a → b is a:

monomorphism (or monic) if f ∘ g1 = f ∘ g2 implies g1 = g2 for all morphisms g1, g2 : x → a.
epimorphism (or epic) if g1 ∘ f = g2 ∘ f implies g1 = g2 for all morphisms g1, g2 : b → x.
bimorphism if f is both epic and monic.
isomorphism if there exists a morphism g : b → a such that f ∘ g = 1b and g ∘ f = 1a.[b]
endomorphism if a = b. end(a) denotes the class of endomorphisms of a.
automorphism if f is both an endomorphism and an isomorphism. aut(a) denotes the class of automorphisms of a.
retraction if a right inverse of f exists, i.e. if there exists a morphism g : b → a with f ∘ g = 1b.
section if a left inverse of f exists, i.e. if there exists a morphism g : b → a with g ∘ f = 1a.
Every retraction is an epimorphism, and every section is a monomorphism. Furthermore, the following three statements are equivalent:

f is a monomorphism and a retraction;
f is an epimorphism and a section;
f is an isomorphism.
Functors[edit]
Main article: Functor
Functors are structure-preserving maps between categories. They can be thought of as morphisms in the category of all (small) categories.
A (covariant) functor F from a category C to a category D, written F : C → D, consists of:

for each object x in C, an object F(x) in D; and
for each morphism f : x → y in C, a morphism F(f) : F(x) → F(y) in D,
such that the following two properties hold:

For every object x in C, F(1x) = 1F(x);
For all morphisms f : x → y and g : y → z, F(g ∘ f) = F(g) ∘ F(f).
A contravariant functor F: C → D is like a covariant functor, except that it "turns morphisms around" ("reverses all the arrows"). More specifically, every morphism f : x → y in C must be assigned to a morphism  F(f) : F(y) → F(x) in D. In other words, a contravariant functor acts as a covariant functor from the opposite category Cop to D.

Natural transformations[edit]
Main article: Natural transformation
A natural transformation is a relation between two functors. Functors often describe "natural constructions" and natural transformations then describe "natural homomorphisms" between two such constructions. Sometimes two quite different constructions yield "the same" result; this is expressed by a natural isomorphism between the two functors.
If F and G are (covariant) functors between the categories C and D, then a natural transformation η from F to G associates to every object X in C a morphism ηX : F(X) → G(X) in D such that for every morphism f : X → Y in C, we have ηY ∘ F(f) = G(f) ∘ ηX; this means that the following diagram is commutative:

Commutative diagram defining natural transformations
The two functors F and G are called naturally isomorphic if there exists a natural transformation from F to G such that ηX is an isomorphism for every object X in C.

Other concepts[edit]
Universal constructions, limits, and colimits[edit]
Main articles: Universal property and Limit (category theory)
Using the language of category theory, many areas of mathematical study can be categorized. Categories include sets, groups and topologies.
Each category is distinguished by properties that all its objects have in common, such as the empty set or the product of two topologies, yet in the definition of a category, objects are considered atomic, i.e., we do not know whether an object A is a set, a topology, or any other abstract concept. Hence, the challenge is to define special objects without referring to the internal structure of those objects. To define the empty set without referring to elements, or the product topology without referring to open sets, one can characterize these objects in terms of their relations to other objects, as given by the morphisms of the respective categories. Thus, the task is to find universal properties that uniquely determine the objects of interest.
Numerous important constructions can be described in a purely categorical way if the category limit can be developed and dualized to yield the notion of a colimit.

Equivalent categories[edit]
Main articles: Equivalence of categories and Isomorphism of categories
It is a natural question to ask: under which conditions can two categories be considered essentially the same, in the sense that theorems about one category can readily be transformed into theorems about the other category? The major tool one employs to describe such a situation is called equivalence of categories, which is given by appropriate functors between two categories. Categorical equivalence has found numerous applications in mathematics.

Further concepts and results[edit]
The definitions of categories and functors provide only the very basics of categorical algebra; additional important topics are listed below. Although there are strong interrelations between all of these topics, the given order can be considered as a guideline for further reading.

The functor category DC has as objects the functors from C to D and as morphisms the natural transformations of such functors. The Yoneda lemma is one of the most famous basic results of category theory; it describes representable functors in functor categories.
Duality: Every statement, theorem, or definition in category theory has a dual which is essentially obtained by "reversing all the arrows". If one statement is true in a category C then its dual is true in the dual category Cop. This duality, which is transparent at the level of category theory, is often obscured in applications and can lead to surprising relationships.
Adjoint functors: A functor can be left (or right) adjoint to another functor that maps in the opposite direction. Such a pair of adjoint functors typically arises from a construction defined by a universal property; this can be seen as a more abstract and powerful view on universal properties.
Higher-dimensional categories[edit]
Main article: Higher category theory
Many of the above concepts, especially equivalence of categories, adjoint functor pairs, and functor categories, can be situated into the context of higher-dimensional categories. Briefly, if we consider a morphism between two objects as a "process taking us from one object to another", then higher-dimensional categories allow us to profitably generalize this by considering "higher-dimensional processes".
For example, a (strict) 2-category is a category together with "morphisms between morphisms", i.e., processes which allow us to transform one morphism into another. We can then "compose" these "bimorphisms" both horizontally and vertically, and we require a 2-dimensional "exchange law" to hold, relating the two composition laws. In this context, the standard example is Cat, the 2-category of all (small) categories, and in this example, bimorphisms of morphisms are simply natural transformations of morphisms in the usual sense. Another basic example is to consider a 2-category with a single object; these are essentially monoidal categories. Bicategories are a weaker notion of 2-dimensional categories in which the composition of morphisms is not strictly associative, but only associative "up to" an isomorphism.
This process can be extended for all natural numbers n, and these are called n-categories. There is even a notion of ω-category corresponding to the ordinal number ω.
Higher-dimensional categories are part of the broader mathematical field of higher-dimensional algebra, a concept introduced by Ronald Brown.  For a conversational introduction to these ideas, see John Baez, 'A Tale of n-categories' (1996).

Historical notes[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Main article: Timeline of category theory and related mathematics
It should be observed first that the whole concept of a  category is essentially an auxiliary one; our basic concepts are essentially those of a functor and of a natural transformation [...]— Eilenberg and Mac Lane (1945) [2]
Whilst specific examples of functors and natural transformations had been given by Samuel Eilenberg and Saunders Mac Lane in a 1942 paper on group theory,[3] these concepts were introduced in a more general sense, together with the additional notion of categories, in a 1945 paper by the same authors[2] (who  discussed applications of category theory to the field of algebraic topology).[4] Their work was an important part of the transition from intuitive and geometric homology to homological algebra, Eilenberg and Mac Lane later writing that their goal was to understand natural transformations, which first required the definition of functors, then categories.
Stanislaw Ulam, and some writing on his behalf, have claimed that related ideas were current in the late 1930s in Poland. Eilenberg was Polish, and studied mathematics in Poland in the 1930s. Category theory is also, in some sense, a continuation of the work of Emmy Noether (one of Mac Lane's teachers) in formalizing abstract processes;[5] Noether realized that understanding a type of mathematical structure requires understanding the processes that preserve that structure (homomorphisms).[citation needed] Eilenberg and Mac Lane introduced categories for understanding and formalizing the processes (functors) that relate topological structures to  algebraic structures (topological invariants) that characterize them.
Category theory was originally introduced for the need of homological algebra, and widely extended for the need of modern algebraic geometry (scheme theory). Category theory may be viewed as an extension of universal algebra, as the latter studies algebraic structures, and the former applies to any kind of mathematical structure and studies also the relationships between structures of different nature. For this reason, it is used throughout mathematics. Applications to mathematical logic and semantics (categorical abstract machine) came later.
Certain categories called topoi (singular topos) can even serve as an alternative to axiomatic set theory as a foundation of mathematics. A topos can also be considered as a specific type of category with two additional topos axioms. These foundational applications of category theory have been worked out in fair detail as a basis for, and justification of, constructive mathematics. Topos theory is a form of abstract sheaf theory, with geometric origins, and leads to ideas such as pointless topology.
Categorical logic is now a well-defined field based on type theory for intuitionistic logics, with applications in functional programming and domain theory, where a cartesian closed category is taken as a non-syntactic description of a lambda calculus. At the very least, category theoretic language clarifies what exactly these related areas have in common (in some abstract sense).
Category theory has been applied in other fields as well, see applied category theory. For example, John Baez has shown a link between Feynman diagrams in physics and monoidal categories.[6] Another application of category theory, more specifically topos theory, has been made in mathematical music theory, see for example the book The Topos of Music, Geometric Logic of Concepts, Theory, and Performance by Guerino Mazzola.
More recent efforts to introduce undergraduates to categories as a foundation for mathematics include those of William Lawvere and Rosebrugh (2003) and Lawvere and Stephen Schanuel (1997) and Mirroslav Yotov (2012).

See also[edit]

Mathematics portal

Domain theory
Enriched category theory
Glossary of category theory
Group theory
Higher category theory
Higher-dimensional algebra
Important publications in category theory
Lambda calculus
Outline of category theory
Timeline of category theory and related mathematics
Applied category theory

Notes[edit]


^ Some authors compose in the opposite order, writing fg or f ∘ g for g ∘ f.  Computer scientists using category theory very commonly write f ; g for g ∘ f

^ A morphism that is both epic and monic is not necessarily an isomorphism. An elementary counterexample: in the category consisting of two objects A and B, the identity morphisms, and a single morphism f from A to B, f is both epic and monic but is not an isomorphism.


References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ Marquis, Jean-Pierre (2023), Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), "Category Theory", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2023 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, retrieved 2024-04-23

^ a b Eilenberg, Samuel; Mac Lane, Saunders (1945). "General theory of natural equivalences" (PDF). Transactions of the American Mathematical Society. 58: 247. doi:10.1090/S0002-9947-1945-0013131-6. ISSN 0002-9947. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-10.

^ Eilenberg, S.; Mac Lane, S. (1942). "Group Extensions and Homology". Annals of Mathematics. 43 (4): 757–831. doi:10.2307/1968966. ISSN 0003-486X. JSTOR 1968966 – via JSTOR.

^ Marquis, Jean-Pierre (2019). "Category Theory". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Department of Philosophy, Stanford University. Retrieved 26 September 2022.

^ Reck, Erich (2020). The Prehistory of Mathematical Structuralism (1st ed.). Oxford University Press. pp. 215–219. ISBN 9780190641221.

^ Baez, J.C.; Stay, M. (2010). "Physics, Topology, Logic and Computation: A Rosetta Stone". New Structures for Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics. Vol. 813. pp. 95–172. arXiv:0903.0340. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-12821-9_2. ISBN 978-3-642-12820-2. S2CID 115169297.


Sources[edit]

Adámek, Jiří; Herrlich, Horst; Strecker, George E. (2004). Abstract and Concrete Categories. Heldermann Verlag Berlin.
Awodey, Steve (2010). Category Theory. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0199237180.
Barr, Michael; Wells, Charles (2012) [1995], Category Theory for Computing Science, Reprints in Theory and Applications of Categories, vol. 22 (3rd ed.).
Barr, Michael; Wells, Charles (2005), Toposes, Triples and Theories, Reprints in Theory and Applications of Categories, vol. 12, MR 2178101.
Borceux, Francis (1994). Handbook of categorical algebra. Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications. Cambridge University Press. pp. 50–52. ISBN 9780521441780.
Freyd, Peter J. (2003) [1964]. Abelian Categories. Reprints in Theory and Applications of Categories. Vol. 3.
Freyd, Peter J.; Scedrov, Andre (1990). Categories, allegories. North Holland Mathematical Library. Vol. 39. North Holland. ISBN 978-0-08-088701-2.
Goldblatt, Robert (2006) [1979]. Topoi: The Categorial Analysis of Logic. Studies in logic and the foundations of mathematics. Vol. 94. Dover. ISBN 978-0-486-45026-1.
Herrlich, Horst; Strecker, George E. (2007). Category Theory (3rd ed.). Heldermann Verlag Berlin. ISBN 978-3-88538-001-6..
Kashiwara, Masaki; Schapira, Pierre (2006). Categories and Sheaves. Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften. Vol. 332. Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-27949-5.
Lawvere, F. William; Rosebrugh, Robert (2003). Sets for Mathematics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-01060-3.
Lawvere, F. William; Schanuel, Stephen Hoel (2009) [1997]. Conceptual Mathematics: A First Introduction to Categories (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-89485-2.
Leinster, Tom [in German] (2004). Higher Operads, Higher Categories. London Math. Society Lecture Note Series. Vol. 298. Cambridge University Press. p. 448. Bibcode:2004hohc.book.....L. ISBN 978-0-521-53215-0. Archived from the original on 2003-10-25. Retrieved 2006-04-03.
Leinster, Tom [in German] (2014). Basic Category Theory. Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Vol. 143. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:1612.09375. ISBN 9781107044241.
Lurie, Jacob (2009). Higher Topos Theory. Annals of Mathematics Studies. Vol. 170. Princeton University Press. arXiv:math.CT/0608040. ISBN 978-0-691-14049-0. MR 2522659.
Mac Lane, Saunders (1998). Categories for the Working Mathematician. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Vol. 5 (2nd ed.). Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-0-387-98403-2. MR 1712872.
Mac Lane, Saunders; Birkhoff, Garrett (1999) [1967]. Algebra (2nd ed.). Chelsea. ISBN 978-0-8218-1646-2.
Martini, A.; Ehrig, H.; Nunes, D. (1996). "Elements of basic category theory". Technical Report. 96 (5).
Mazzola, Guerino (2002). The Topos of Music, Geometric Logic of Concepts, Theory, and Performance. Birkhäuser. ISBN 978-3-7643-5731-3.
Pedicchio, Maria Cristina; Tholen, Walter, eds. (2004). Categorical foundations. Special topics in order, topology, algebra, and sheaf theory. Encyclopedia of Mathematics and Its Applications. Vol. 97. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83414-8. Zbl 1034.18001.
Pierce, Benjamin C. (1991). Basic Category Theory for Computer Scientists. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-66071-6.
Schalk, A.; Simmons, H. (2005). An introduction to Category Theory in four easy movements (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-03-21. Retrieved 2007-12-03. Notes for a course offered as part of the MSc. in Mathematical Logic, Manchester University.
Simmons, Harold (2011), An Introduction to Category Theory, ISBN 978-0521283045.
Simpson, Carlos (2010). Homotopy theory of higher categories. arXiv:1001.4071. Bibcode:2010arXiv1001.4071S., draft of a book.
Taylor, Paul (1999). Practical Foundations of Mathematics. Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Vol. 59. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-63107-5.
Turi, Daniele (1996–2001). "Category Theory Lecture Notes" (PDF). Retrieved 11 December 2009. Based on Mac Lane 1998.

Further reading[edit]

Marquis, Jean-Pierre (2008). From a Geometrical Point of View: A Study of the History and Philosophy of Category Theory. Springer. ISBN 978-1-4020-9384-5.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Category theory.




Wikiquote has quotations related to Category theory.


Theory and Application of Categories, an electronic journal of category theory, full text, free, since 1995.
nLab, a wiki project on mathematics, physics and philosophy with emphasis on the n-categorical point of view.
The n-Category Café, essentially a colloquium on topics in category theory.
Category Theory, a web page of links to lecture notes and freely available books on category theory.
Hillman, Chris (2001), A Categorical Primer, CiteSeerX 10.1.1.24.3264, a formal introduction to category theory.
Adamek, J.; Herrlich, H.; Stecker, G. "Abstract and Concrete Categories-The Joy of Cats" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2006-06-10.
"Category Theory" entry  by Jean-Pierre Marquis in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, with an extensive bibliography.
List of academic conferences on category theory
Baez, John (1996). "The Tale of n-categories". — An informal introduction to higher order categories.
WildCats is a category theory package for Mathematica. Manipulation and visualization of objects, morphisms, categories, functors, natural transformations, universal properties.
The catsters's channel on YouTube, a channel about category theory.
Category theory at PlanetMath..
Video archive of recorded talks relevant to categories, logic and the foundations of physics.
Interactive Web page which generates examples of categorical constructions in the category of finite sets.
Category Theory for the Sciences, an instruction on category theory as a tool throughout the sciences.
Category Theory for Programmers A book in blog form explaining category theory for computer programmers.
Introduction to category theory.

vteMajor mathematics areas
History
Timeline
Future
Lists
Glossary
Foundations
Category theory
Information theory
Mathematical logic
Philosophy of mathematics
Set theory
Type theory
Algebra
Abstract
Commutative
Elementary
Group theory
Linear
Multilinear
Universal
Homological
Analysis
Calculus
Real analysis
Complex analysis
Hypercomplex analysis
Differential equations
Functional analysis
Harmonic analysis
Measure theory
Discrete
Combinatorics
Graph theory
Order theory
Geometry
Algebraic
Analytic
Arithmetic
Differential
Discrete
Euclidean
Finite
Number theory
Arithmetic
Algebraic number theory
Analytic number theory
Diophantine geometry
Topology
General
Algebraic
Differential
Geometric
Homotopy theory
Applied
Engineering mathematics
Mathematical biology
Mathematical chemistry
Mathematical economics
Mathematical finance
Mathematical physics
Mathematical psychology
Mathematical sociology
Mathematical statistics
Probability
Statistics
Systems science
Control theory
Game theory
Operations research
Computational
Computer science
Theory of computation
Computational complexity theory
Numerical analysis
Optimization
Computer algebra
Related topics
Mathematicians
lists
Informal mathematics
Films about mathematicians
Recreational mathematics
Mathematics and art
Mathematics education

 Mathematics portal
 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject

vteCategory theoryKey conceptsKey concepts
Category
Abelian
Additive
Concrete
Pre-abelian
Preadditive
Bicategory
Adjoint functors
CCC
Commutative diagram
End
Exponential
Functor
Kan extension
Morphism
Natural transformation
Universal property
Universal constructionsLimits
Terminal objects
Products
Equalizers
Kernels
Pullbacks
Inverse limit
Colimits
Initial objects
Coproducts
Coequalizers
Cokernels and quotients
Pushout
Direct limit
Algebraic categories
Sets
Relations
Magmas
Groups
Abelian groups
Rings (Fields)
Modules (Vector spaces)
Constructions on categories
Free category
Functor category
Kleisli category
Opposite category
Quotient category
Product category
Comma category
Subcategory
Higher category theory
Key concepts
Categorification
Enriched category
Higher-dimensional algebra
Homotopy hypothesis
Model category
Simplex category
String diagram
Topos
n-categoriesWeak n-categories
Bicategory (pseudofunctor)
Tricategory
Tetracategory
Kan complex
∞-groupoid
∞-topos
Strict n-categories
2-category (2-functor)
3-category
Categorified concepts
2-group
2-ring
En-ring
(Traced)(Symmetric) monoidal category
n-group
n-monoid


 Category
 Outline
 Glossary

vteComputer scienceNote: This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System.Hardware
Printed circuit board
Peripheral
Integrated circuit
Very Large Scale Integration
Systems on Chip (SoCs)
Energy consumption (Green computing)
Electronic design automation
Hardware acceleration
Computer systems organization
Computer architecture
Computational complexity
Dependability
Embedded system
Real-time computing
Networks
Network architecture
Network protocol
Network components
Network scheduler
Network performance evaluation
Network service
Software organization
Interpreter
Middleware
Virtual machine
Operating system
Software quality
Software notations and tools
Programming paradigm
Programming language
Compiler
Domain-specific language
Modeling language
Software framework
Integrated development environment
Software configuration management
Software library
Software repository
Software development
Control variable
Software development process
Requirements analysis
Software design
Software construction
Software deployment
Software engineering
Software maintenance
Programming team
Open-source model
Theory of computation
Model of computation
Formal language
Automata theory
Computability theory
Computational complexity theory
Logic
Semantics
Algorithms
Algorithm design
Analysis of algorithms
Algorithmic efficiency
Randomized algorithm
Computational geometry
Mathematics of computing
Discrete mathematics
Probability
Statistics
Mathematical software
Information theory
Mathematical analysis
Numerical analysis
Theoretical computer science
Information systems
Database management system
Information storage systems
Enterprise information system
Social information systems
Geographic information system
Decision support system
Process control system
Multimedia information system
Data mining
Digital library
Computing platform
Digital marketing
World Wide Web
Information retrieval
Security
Cryptography
Formal methods
Security hacker
Security services
Intrusion detection system
Hardware security
Network security
Information security
Application security
Human–computer interaction
Interaction design
Social computing
Ubiquitous computing
Visualization
Accessibility
Concurrency
Concurrent computing
Parallel computing
Distributed computing
Multithreading
Multiprocessing
Artificial intelligence
Natural language processing
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Computer vision
Automated planning and scheduling
Search methodology
Control method
Philosophy of artificial intelligence
Distributed artificial intelligence
Machine learning
Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Multi-task learning
Cross-validation
Graphics
Animation
Rendering
Photograph manipulation
Graphics processing unit
Mixed reality
Virtual reality
Image compression
Solid modeling
Applied computing
Quantum Computing
E-commerce
Enterprise software
Computational mathematics
Computational physics
Computational chemistry
Computational biology
Computational social science
Computational engineering
Differentiable computing
Computational healthcare
Digital art
Electronic publishing
Cyberwarfare
Electronic voting
Video games
Word processing
Operations research
Educational technology
Document management

 Category
 Outline
WikiProject
 Commons

vteMajor topics in Foundations of MathematicsMathematical logic
Peano axioms
Mathematical induction
Formal system
Axiomatic system
Hilbert system
Natural deduction
Mathematical proof
Model theory
Mathematical constructivism
Modal logic
List of mathematical logic topics
Set theory
Set
Naive set theory
Axiomatic set theory
Zermelo set theory
Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory
Constructive set theory
Descriptive set theory
Determinacy
Russell's paradox
List of set theory topics
Type theory
Axiom of reducibility
Simple type theory
Dependent type theory
Intuitionistic type theory
Homotopy type theory
Univalent foundations
Girard's paradox
Category theory
Category
Topos theory
Category of sets
Higher category theory
∞-groupoid
∞-topos theory
Mathematical structuralism
Glossary of category theory
List of category theory topics

Authority control databases National
Germany
Czech Republic
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Category_theory&oldid=1222672993"
Categories: Category theoryHigher category theoryFoundations of mathematicsHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles lacking in-text citations from November 2009All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles needing additional references from November 2015All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2020Commons category link from WikidataArticles with Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy linksArticles with GND identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with EMU identifiers






 This page was last edited on 7 May 2024, at 08:05 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view


















