

CI Reader Volume 2 Chapter 1












National
      Counterintelligence
      Center 

 








 
Introduction 
         
The 
        Office of 
        Naval Intelligence (ONI) 
Colepaugh 
        and Gimpel
The 
        Custodial Detention Program 
President 
        Roosevelt's
        Directive of December 
        1941
German 
        Espionage 
        Ring Captured 
Counterintelligence 
        Operations 
FBI 
        Wartime 
        Operations 
The 
        Counter 
        Intelligence Corps
        During World War II 
Duquesne
Spy 
        Ring
George 
        John Dasch
Plan 
        Bodyguard
The 
        GARBO
        Operation 
Igor 
        Sergeyevich Guzenko 
The 
        Postwar Expansion of
        FBI Domestic Intelligence 
The 
        Federal
        Loyalty-Security Program 
FBI-Military 
        Intelligence Jurisdictional Agreement
Security 
        and the Manhattan Project
CI 
        in World War II
        Bibliography 
CI 
        in World War II
        Chronology 
CI 
        in World War II
        End Notes




 


CHAPTER 
              1 CONTINUED
Security and the Manhattan 
              Project 149

The leaders of the American atomic energy program, aware of the 
              tremendous military potentiality of atomic research, recognized 
              almost from the beginning the need for maintaining a high degree 
              of secrecy. An important factor in their decision in early 1942 
              to turn over administration of the program to the Army was their 
              conviction that it was the organization best prepared during wartime 
              to enforce a foolproof system of security. Such a system would ensure 
              that the Axis powers remained ignorant of Allied interest in developing 
              atomic weapons; reduce the likelihood that the Axis states, particularly 
              Germany, would accelerate their own efforts to produce atomic weapons 
              and undertake espionage and sabotage activities against the American 
              program; and, most significantly, from the standpoint of military 
              effectiveness, allow the Allies to employ these weapons against 
              the Axis nations with maximum surprise.150 

Early Aspects 
              First efforts to establish security in atomic matters had occurred 
              in 1939, when refugee physicists in the United States attempted 
              to institute a voluntary censorship on publication of papers concerning 
              uranium fission. American scientists did not accept this suggestion 
              initially, but the outbreak of World War II brought home to many 
              of them the need for control over publications relating to atomic 
              fission. To formalize a censorship program, the Division of Physical 
              Sciences of the National Research Council in April 1940 established 
              a committee that succeeded in getting most scientists to withhold 
              publication of papers on sensitive subjects, particularly those 
              concerned with uranium fission.

In June, when the government-sponsored Committee on Uranium became 
              a subcommittee of the newly constituted National Defense Research 
              Committee (NDRC), it also became subject to the security measures 
              currently in effect for federal agencies. The NDRC, knowing that 
              it was to be concerned chiefly with projects for the Army and Navy, 
              adopted security regulations that conformed to those of the two 
              military services. Under these regulations NDRC subcommittees were 
              required to adhere to a policy of strict compartmentalization of 
              information, to classify all sensitive materials, and to obtain 
              security clearances for all employees.

Transfer of the NDRC uranium program to the Office of Scientific 
              Research and Development (OSRD) in November 1941 did not significantly 
              alter existing security arrangements, because the OSRD patterned 
              its own security system largely along the lines of the NDRC program. 
              As the OSRD became more involved in negotiation and administration 
              of contracts with industrial and research organizations, however, 
              it expanded its security controls to provide a more adequate coverage, 
              adding security measures for personnel administration, classified 
              information, and plant protection.151 
Street Scene in Los Alamos. 
              The barbed wire fence separates 
              the technical installations from the residential area.
 PHOTO 
                
The modest OSRD security system sufficed until, in 
              the spring of 1942, the start of the uranium program's rapid expansion__the 
              letting of numerous contracts with industrial firms; the employment 
              and interaction of ultimately tens of thousands of workers, scientists, 
              and engineers; and the formation of complex organizations to construct 
              and operate the large-scale production plants and their atomic communities—enormously 
              complicated the pro-blems of security just at the time the Army 
              under-took its new role as project administrator. Although these 
              measures were necessary for the more rapid achievement of a successful 
              fission weapon, they also tended to weaken security.152 
              Consequently, the Army almost immediately undertook a reorganization 
              and expansion of the existing OSRD security system and, eventually, 
              also endeavored to bring the system more directly under control 
              of the Manhattan District. The system that finally evolved was in 
              many respects unique and introduced a number of innovations in technique 
              and organization that subsequently would be adopted as standard 
              features of government security programs. 

The District's Security System 
              The security system, as it took form in the newly established Manhattan 
              District, resembled that already in existence in most other engineer 
              districts. Under Army regulations in force in 1942, the security 
              program of an engineer district was limited to routine local security 
              requirements. When broader problems arose, the district engineer 
              or security officer could call upon the resources of the Assistant 
              Chief of Staff, G-2, in the War Department. Since June 1939, under 
              provisions of a presidential proclamation, the War Department's 
              Military Intelligence Division (MID) had shared responsibility for 
              matters of espionage, counterespionage, and sabotage in the United 
              States with the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the Office 
              of Naval Intelligence. In the latest revision (February 1942) of 
              this Delimitations Agreement—so designated because it set forth 
              the area of jurisdiction of each agency__the MID's assignment was 
              to cover the military establishment, including War Department civilian 
              employees and civilians on military reservations or under military 
              control, plus a large part of the munitions industry.153


Organization And Scope 
              Col. James C. Marshall, in organizing the Manhattan District security 
              program soon after becoming district engineer in June 1942, formed 
              the Protective Security Section. Under direction of a member of 
              Marshall's staff, this section emphasized such aspects as personnel, 
              plant, and military information security. At the same time, to provide 
              the District security staff with counterintelligence assistance, 
              Marshall arranged with the Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Maj. Gen. 
              George V. Strong, for security liaison with the MID's operating 
              element, the Military Intelligence Service (MIS). From his staff, 
              Gen. Strong assigned counterintelligence responsibility for the 
              atomic project to Maj. John Lansdale, Jr., who had been a lawyer 
              in civilian life.

Because effective security operations required maximum secrecy, 
              Maj. Lansdale personally visited the Western Defense Command G-2 
              and each service command and requested that they each select an 
              officer to report directly to him, bypassing both the G-2 and the 
              commanding general of each service command.154 To further 
              facilitate carrying out the internal security functions for the 
              atomic project, Lansdale also organized a quasi-clandestine counter-intelligence 
              group. This group operated under cover of the Investigation Review 
              Branch, Assistant Chief of MIS for Security, which Lansdale headed. 
              He reported directly to Gen. Groves, and his group in effect was 
              answerable to the Manhattan Project commander in all substantive 
              respects, even though it functioned from the G-2 office in the Pentagon.155

By early 1943, the pace of the District's growth__ both geographically 
              and in terms of personnel__and its increasing security requirements 
              emphasized the need for a more comprehensive counterintelligence 
              program. In February, Gen. Strong transferred Capts. Horace K. Calvert 
              and Robert J. McLeod to the District headquarters, where they formed 
              the District's new Intelligence Section. To ensure that this section, 
              which Cap. Calvert headed, had full access to the intelligence and 
              security facilities of the Army service commands, Strong requested 
              that each command designate a staff officer to act as a point of 
              liaison with the Manhattan District and, to guarantee secrecy, authorized 
              that each correspond directly with Calvert's section. At the same 
              time, Groves continued his earlier practice of meeting with G-2 
              officers to make certain that District security problems were brought 
              to the attention of appropriate Army officials.156

The counterintelligence program became the foundation for a countrywide 
              permanent organization of this aspect of the District's security 
              system. During the course of the year, the District organized its 
              own Counterintelligence Corps (CIC) and, as its staff increased 
              in size, assigned new personnel to those areas where there was the 
              greatest concentration of project activities. Ultimately, the project 
              had a total of eleven branch intelligence offices at key points 
              across the United States, from New York to Pasadena (California). 
              An officer assigned to a branch usually worked out of an area engineer's 
              office and, in addition to his intelligence duties, served as security 
              officer on the engineer's staff. While in matters of command these 
              officers came under control of the Manhattan District intelligence 
              and security officer and reported to him, they also maintained a 
              direct liaison channel with the director of intelligence of the 
              service command that had jurisdiction over their area.157

Expansion and Centralization 
              Rapid growth also necessitated expansion of other aspects of the 
              Manhattan Project's security system. In 1942, the District's relatively 
              modest internal security organization had served well enough for 
              a program that consisted primarily of administering research and 
              development activities carried on in university and industrial laboratories; 
              but, by the summer of 1943, a vast program of plant construction 
              and operation had begun.

The move of the District headquarters from New York to Oak Ridge 
              in August 1943 provided an opportune time for reorganization. The 
              first step was consolidation in July 1943 of the Protective Security 
              and Intelligence Sections. Capt. Calvert took over responsibility 
              for the combined unit, designated the Intelligence and Security 
              Section. Although this change was relatively minor from an administrative 
              standpoint (the section continued in a distinctly subordinate position 
              in the District's Service and Control Division), it represented 
              a significant shift towards centralization in security matters. 
              This change was consistent with Gen. Groves's conviction that only 
              through a high degree of centralized control could he and his administrative 
              staff maintain a close and constant scrutiny over the security program.158

Shortly after the District had completed its move to Oak Ridge, 
              a reorganization in the Army's administration of counterintelligence 
              operations in the zone of interior (ZI) posed a threat to Groves's 
              control and cognizance over the project's internal security functions. 
              To economize on internal investigative operations and to concentrate 
              G-2 efforts on expanding counterintelligence operations overseas, 
              the War Department directed the transfer effective 1 January 1944 
              of the WDGS (War Department General Staff) G-2 counterintelligence 
              activities in the ZI to the Office of the Provost Marshal General. 
              The effect was to decentralize even further the Army's ZI counterintelligence 
              functions to the service commands including maintenance of data 
              files on individuals, which Manhattan intelligence officials considered 
              essential to their operations. The change also seemed certain to 
              enhance the difficulties the atomic project already was experiencing 
              coordinating its material security operations with the service commands.159

From his vantage point as head of the atomic project's counterintelligence 
              group inside G-2, Col. Lansdale endeavored to have the group exempted 
              from the reorganization requirements. When his efforts failed, Gen. 
              Groves decided that the only acceptable solution was to move Lansdale's 
              unit into the Manhattan District. The G-2 sanctioned this change 
              in December, and Lansdale secured authorization to establish a special 
              counterintelligence detachment. Groves arranged for Lansdale's transfer 
              to the Manhattan District; however, instead of placing him in charge 
              of the new CIC Detachment, he brought Lansdale into his Washington 
              office as his special assistant for security affairs. Lansdale's 
              assignment was to keep the Manhattan chief abreast of problems and 
              developments affecting internal security and foreign intelligence 
              wherever they might arise in the project.160

The shift of all project counterintelligence activities to the 
              District required major changes in its security organization. The 
              Intelligence and Security Section in February 1944 became a full-fledged 
              division and, in keeping with Groves's centralization policy, moved 
              from the Service and Control Division into the district engineer's 
              own office. To replace Capt. Calvert, whom Groves had selected for 
              a special intelligence mission in London, Col. Nichols—the 
              district engineer since August 1943—brought in an ex-perienced 
              intelligence officer, Lt. Col. William B. Parsons, to head the new 
              division. In this capacity, Parsons administered the District's 
              security program with the assistance of Maj. McLeod, the deputy, 
              and Capt. Bernard W. Menke, the executive officer, and with support 
              from a large operating staff of military and civilian personnel. 
              Although Parsons officially reported to Nichols, he personally kept 
              Gen. Groves appraised of all developments.

Expanding intelligence and security activities necessitated procurement 
              of additional personnel to carry out supportive security functions, 
              such as plant inspections and technical and undercover investigations, 
              Col. Parsons drew 25 officers and 137 enlisted men from the War 
              Department's counter-intelligence manpower pool, and the District's 
              personnel specialists recruited a large number of civilians. In 
              May 1944, to provide administrative services for the expanding security 
              force, Nichols activated the 13th Special Engineer Detachment 
              (Provisional) and assigned Parsons the additional duty of unit commander. 
              Concerned about achieving greater efficiency in security operations, 
              Parsons requested and received permission in January 1945 to combine 
              the 13th with the CIC Detachment.161

By this time, Parsons' Intelligence and Security Division had become 
              a highly centralized unit, organizationally divided into six separate 
              branches: Clinton Engineer Works (CEW), Security, Administration, 
              Safeguarding Military Information (SMI), Branch Offices, and Evaluation 
              and Review. The CEW, Security, and Administration Branches, for 
              which McLeod had direct responsibility, dealt primarily with security 
              matters at the Tennessee site. The CEW Branch administered the local 
              civilian guard force and the military police contingent that protected 
              the Tennessee reservation; coordinated subordinate security offices 
              in the K-25 (gaseous diffusion), Y-12 (electromagnetic), and X-10 
              (pile) process areas; and, through a board established for the purpose, 
              reviewed security cases. The Security Branch chiefly monitored activities 
              related to security of project manufacturing plants, especially 
              at the Clinton site, and the shipping of classified materials and 
              equipment. The Administration Branch was concerned primarily with 
              personnel security problems, both military and civilian, but also 
              provided facilities for the special handling of the divisions mail 
              and records and administered certain confidential funds.

The SMI, Branch Offices, and Evaluation and Review Branches, for 
              which Capt. Menke had direct responsibility, eventually evolved 
              as a central clearinghouse for intelligence and security matters 
              that related not only to the Tennessee site but also to the various 
              project operations elsewhere. The principal responsibility of the 
              SMI Branch was that of projectwide monitoring of programs in security 
              education, censorship, and the handling of classified materials. 
              The Branch Offices Branch, as its name would indicate, was responsible 
              for coordinating field security operations in the eleven geographical 
              areas where atomic energy activities were in progress and for reporting 
              the area engineers' security problems to the division's Evaluation 
              and Review Branch. The latter branch concentrated in one office 
              the functions hitherto performed by several of the branch intelligence 
              offices__most notably, those concerned with the conduct of subversive 
              investigations and the preparation of special reports on District 
              security matters for higher echelons.162 

Counterintelligence Activities 
              Counterintelligence activities constituted one of the most significant 
              aspects of the District's security program. Through effective counterintelligence 
              measures, the District sought to provide the shroud of secrecy necessary 
              to forestall all attempts by the enemy not only to gain information 
              about the American atomic energy program but also to sabotage it.

Yet by its very nature, the Manhattan Project remained vulnerable 
              to espionage and sabotage. The District's recruitment of thousands 
              of individuals with almost every conceivable kind of background 
              and from all parts of the country made likely the employment of 
              some potential spies and saboteurs, no matter how efficient its 
              clearance procedures might be, and its widely scattered installations 
              made implementation and maintenance of uniform security procedures 
              throughout the project very difficult. The reality of these conditions 
              forced project leaders to assume that, sooner or later, Germany 
              and Japan__ and even the Soviet Union__would learn of the atomic 
              energy program and, more importantly, use espionage to expand their 
              knowledge of it and sabotage to destroy America's military advantage.

To detect and counter potential espionage and sabotage activities, 
              the District's CIC Detachment relied primarily upon extensive intelligence 
              investigations. The majority of these investigations were of a preventive 
              character, designed to minimize the likelihood that security might 
              be breached. Of this type, for example, were the many security checks 
              into the unauthorized transmission of classified information. In 
              most instances, CIC personnel found that the information leaks thus 
              uncovered were the result of carelessness or ignorance on the part 
              of the employee or individual with knowledge of the project. But 
              because it was always possible such leaks were surface ramifications 
              of much more dangerous espionage activity, all cases of careless 
              handling of classified data received prompt and rigorous corrective 
              action.

A second type of preventive investigation was the supplementary 
              and more thorough check into the background of employees earlier 
              subjected to routine clearance procedures. Most supplementary investigations 
              were made because preliminary data indicated an employee might be 
              a potential security risk or routine procedures had not produced 
              adequate information about the person's background. Typical cases 
              were those involving scientists or technicians who recently had 
              come from abroad, especially those who had come from areas under 
              control of the Axis powers. Faced with a continuing shortage of 
              scientifically and technically trained personnel, project leaders 
              early had adopted the policy of weighing the degree of risk against 
              the contributions an employee with security clearance problems could 
              make in development of atomic weapons. "All procedures and 
              decisions on security, including the clearance of personnel," 
              Groves recalled, "had to be based on what was believed to be 
              the overriding consideration completion of the bomb. Speed of accomplishment 
              was paramount."163

Perhaps the most notable example of the application of Groves's 
              dictum on employing talented individuals who were security risks 
              was the case of J. Robert Oppenheimer. When the Manhattan commander 
              decided to appoint Oppenheimer as head of the Los Alamos Laboratory 
              in February 1943, he did so with full knowledge that the theoretical 
              physicist, who had worked on the project since late 1941, had only 
              an interim security clearance from the OSRD. OSRD Director Vannevar 
              Bush, S-1 Committee Chairman James B. Conant, and the other scientific 
              leaders were generally aware of Oppenheimer's past record of association 
              with Communist-related organizations and individuals. They knew 
              that during the 1930s he had been attracted to a number of Communist-front 
              organizations and, while never a member of the party itself, made 
              fairly regular contributions to Communist-supported causes. Communist 
              fellow travelers, including his former fiancée, were among 
              his friends, and his wife and brother and sister-in-law were former 
              Communists. With the signing of the Nazi Soviet pact in 1939, Oppenheimer 
              had begun to have serious doubts about the Communists; however, 
              he continued to contribute to the Spanish War Relief through party 
              channels until the spring of 1942 and to maintain a casual contact 
              with his former friends.164

Despite his record of past Communist associations, Groves decided 
              Oppenheimer was the best choice to direct the bomb laboratory at 
              Los Alamos, for since 1941, he had been involved in this aspect 
              of research and development under Metallurgical Laboratory Director 
              Arthur Compton and in the summer of 1942 had become head of the 
              project team concentrating on that work. Hardly had Oppenheimer 
              arrived at Los Alamos in the spring of 1943 when the question of 
              his clearance arose in a new form. At the request of the Manhattan 
              commander, Lt. Col. Boris T. Pash, chief of the Counterintelligence 
              Branch of the Western Defense Command, began an investigation of 
              suspected Soviet espionage in the Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley. 
              Several men known or thought to be associated with Oppenheimer came 
              under suspicion and, as a result, so did Oppenheimer himself.165 
              On 29 June, Pash submitted his conclusion that Oppenheimer "may 
              still be connected with the Communist Party." He offered three 
              possible courses: to replace Oppenheimer as soon as possible; to 
              train a second-in-command at Los Alamos as a possible replacement; 
              and, Pash's recommendation, to have Oppenheimer meet with Generals 
              Groves and Strong in Washington so that they could brief him on 
              "the Espionage Act and its ramifications" and also instruct 
              him that the government was fully aware of his Communist "affiliations," 
              that no "leakage of information" would be tolerated, and 
              that the entire project would be held under "rigid control." 
              In recommending this procedure, Pash was of the opinion that Oppenheimer's 
              "personal inclinations would be to protect his own future and 
              reputation and the high degree of honor which would be his if his 
              present work is successful, and, consequently,… that he would 
              lend every effort to cooperating with the Government in any plan 
              which would leave him in charge." In any event, he suggested, 
              Oppenheimer should be told that two bodyguards were being assigned 
              to protect him against violence from Axis agents. These bodyguards 
              should be specially trained counterintelligence agents who would 
              not only serve as bodyguards but also keep a check on Oppenheimer.166

Col. Pash's report did not change Groves's opinion. After a quick 
              visit to Los Alamos, during which he presumably discussed matters 
              with Oppenheimer, Groves directed on 15 July that he be cleared. 
              On his return to Washington a few days later, he directed "that 
              clearance be issued for the employment of Julius Robert Oppenheimer 
              without delay, irrespective of the information which you have concerning 
              Mr. Oppenheimer. He is absolutely essential to the project." 
              As he wrote the Secretary of War four years later, "it was 
              apparent to me that [Oppenheimer] would not be cleared by any agency 
              whose sole responsibility was military security. Nevertheless, my 
              careful study made me feel that, in spite of [his] record, he was 
              fundamentally a loyal American citizen and that, in view of his 
              potential overall value to the project, he should be employed."167
Security sign at the Tennessee 
              site.
PHOTO 
              

Most security cases investigated by the District's CIC Detachment 
              involved breaches of classified information or allegations against 
              employees handling classified work of disloyalty to the United States 
              or of affiliation with organizations espousing subversive ideologies. 
              While many such cases presented the possibility of espionage, in 
              fact, investigations turned up only about one hundred instances 
              of such activity. When suspected cases appeared on the increase 
              in 1943, the Manhattan commander selected a number of the District's 
              own CIC personnel to serve as special undercover agents. They occupied 
              strategically located positions in project offices, laboratories, 
              and plants, set up listening posts, checked intensively into personnel 
              and other records of individuals under suspicion, and took other 
              measures designed to solve espionage cases.168

The appointment of special agents was a move towards greater formalization 
              of the procedure for dealing with espionage, which continued to 
              increase as the project grew in size and scope. Another constructive 
              measure was the establishment of a group of permanent surveillance 
              squads to carry out supplemental and nonroutine personnel investigations. 
              Members of these squads, as well as other District security agents, 
              soon became adept in employing professional counterespionage techniques 
              and in using such surveillance equipment as cameras with special 
              lenses (telephoto and other types) and concealable listening and 
              recording devices. During their investigations of persons suspected 
              of espionage activities, either District employees or individuals 
              who had contact with project personnel, the agents operated in the 
              guise of diverse roles__to mention only a few, hotel clerks, bell 
              captains, tourists, electricians, painters, contractors, and gamblers.

To ensure effective functioning and control of the surveillance 
              squads and other special security agents on a countrywide basis, 
              District security officials developed new channels of coordination 
              and communication through Col. Lansdale's counter-intelligence staff 
              at Groves's Washington headquarters, field security teams at the 
              various branch intelligence offices had access to information from 
              the FBI and other government security agencies. These field teams 
              also had to file written reports of their findings and activities 
              on a regular basis with the Evaluation and Review Branch of the 
              Intelligence and Security Division. As these reports accumulated 
              in the files at District headquarters, they became an important 
              source of information for operation of the whole counterintelligence 
              program. Gen. Groves, in particular, made use of the data garnered 
              from these reports in concert with information acquired from other 
              government agencies in preparing his periodic Military Policy Committee 
              and Top Policy Group briefings on intelligence developments affecting 
              the atomic program. 

Espionage Incidents 
              The most serious espionage activity came not from the enemy but 
              from America's wartime ally: Soviet Russia. Having in the United 
              States a large diplomatic and consular staff as well as other officials 
              for overseeing lend-lease and other assistance programs, the Russians 
              had a more than adequate reservoir of personnel for maintaining 
              an extensive espionage apparatus in this country. Soviet agents, 
              masking as diplomatic and consular officials, turned to members 
              of the Communist Party of the United States and to party sympathizers 
              for assistance in penetrating American wartime institutions and 
              projects. The Russians, making the plea that the American Government 
              was withholding important information and thus unnecessarily delaying 
              Allied victory, recruited many native Communists and fellow travelers 
              to assist them in obtaining vital secrets about wartime activities.169

As early as February 1943, counterintelligence agents of the FBI 
              and Western Defense Command became aware that the Russians were 
              obtaining data concerning activities of the Radiation Laboratory 
              at the University of California. Further investigation revealed 
              that, in October 1942, a leading member of the American Communist 
              Party on the West Coast had advised a fellow party member employed 
              at the Radiation Laboratory to retain his position so he could obtain 
              knowledge of the secret work under way there. This employee and 
              other Communists or Communist sympathizers working at the laboratory 
              were passing on information about the atomic project at Berkeley 
              to Communist Party members, who promptly turned it over to the Soviet 
              vice consul in San Francisco. Evidence came to light in early April 
              that a high official in the Soviet Embassy in Washington had recently 
              given money to a West Coast Communist leader, to be used for espionage. 
              Intensive investiga-tion by Western Defense Command counter-intelligence 
              agents resulted in prompt identification of those Radiation Laboratory 
              employees who were engaging in espionage activities. The laboratory 
              discharged the suspects and, where feasible, the Army inducted them 
              into service, placing them in nonsensitive assignments in which 
              they could be kept under regular observation.170

The District's CIC Detachment scarcely had completed breaking the 
              original espionage chain at Berkeley when, in late August, Oppenheimer 
              reported his suspicion that new leaks apparently had developed in 
              the laboratory's security system. On the occasion of a visit to 
              Berkeley, Oppenheimer met with Col. Pash and told him he had learned 
              that a member of the University of California staff, a man who had 
              been a close friend, was acting as an intermediary for transmission 
              of data from certain Radiation Laboratory employees to representatives 
              of the Soviet Union. By Oppenheimer's account, his friend had been 
              recruited by an official of the Federation of Architects, Engineers, 
              Chemists, and Technicians, a CIO (Congress of Industrial Organizations) 
              union currently trying to organize employees of the Radiation Laboratory. 
              In subsequent questioning, Oppenheimer refused to disclose the name 
              of his friend on the grounds that he was certain the friend was 
              no longer passing information to Soviet representatives. 

Oppenheimer's uncooperativeness at this juncture resulted in the 
              Manhattan commander taking personal action. Groves promptly met 
              with the Los Alamos Laboratory chief and, because the security of 
              the atomic project was at stake, ordered him to reveal the
name of his friend. Faced with Groves's insistence in the matter, 
              Oppenheimer named Haakon Chevalier, a professor of romance languages 
              at the University of California. A short time later, the university 
              dismissed Chevalier from his teaching post, and he left Berkeley. 
              In retrospect, the likelihood that Chevalier passed any classified 
              information about the project to the United States seems remote.171

The Chevalier case was not the final incident of espionage at the 
              Radiation Laboratory. Less than a year later, another serious security 
              leak had developed there. With assistance from Communist Party members 
              living in the San Francisco area, a key scientist from the laboratory 
              met with officials from the local Soviet Consulate. The scientist 
              passed on information concerning the pile process, certain chemical 
              data, and the recently arrived British scientists. The District's 
              CIC Detachment was able to end this espionage activity effectively 
              by securing immediate discharge of the offending scientist, after 
              which, as far as is known, representatives of the Soviet Union made 
              no further attempts to get information from the Berkeley project.172

Meanwhile, probably acting on the basis of information gained at 
              the Radiation Laboratory, the Russians had assigned one of their 
              best men to the Chicago area, with the task of establishing an espionage 
              channel at the Metallurgical Laboratory. By early 1944, this Soviet 
              agent, who was a highly trained engineer with working experience 
              in both Russian and American industry, had made contacts with several 
              Metallurgical Laboratory employees. By the time the FBI learned 
              of his activities in April, the Soviet agent had obtained considerable 
              technical information, which he had passed on to the Russian Consulate 
              in New York. Once identified, the laboratory summarily dismissed 
              the suspected employees. Subsequently, the District's CIC Detachment 
              discovered that one of the discharged workers__a reserve officer 
              who had been called to active duty and assigned to the Northwest 
              Territory in Canada__had taken highly classified material with him 
              when he left the Metallurgical Laboratory. Fortunately, District 
              security officials were able to arrange for confiscation of this 
              material (it was located in the officer's baggage) and for transfer 
              of the officer to a post in the Pacific Theater of Operations where 
              he would have no opportunity to pass on his knowledge to Russia 
              or the Axis powers.173

Judged in terms of the ultimate utility of the information gained, 
              Russian efforts at espionage at the Los Alamos Laboratory in late 
              1944 and early 1945, the crucial period of bomb development, were 
              the most successful of the wartime period. But project counterintelligence 
              agents did not learn of this activity until the late summer of 1945, 
              after the war was over. In a sensational postwar trial, Julius and 
              Ethel Rosenberg and Morton Sobell were convicted of stealing classified 
              data from the laboratory with the assistance of Mrs. Rosenberg's 
              brother, David Greenglass, an Army sergeant at Los Alamos, and of 
              transmitting it to Russian agents. Los Alamos, too, was the place 
              where the German refugee scientist, Klaus Fuchs, while serving as 
              a member of the British team sent to the United States under the 
              interchange program, gained a substantial part of the technical 
              knowledge of the bomb that he subsequently passed on to the Russians, 
              first in June 1945 and thence periodically until his arrest by British 
              authorities in early 1950.174

Project leaders also had anticipated that, as the Russians, the 
              Axis powers, particularly Germany would launch an equally vigorous 
              espionage campaign, but they uncovered no evidence of such activity 
              during the war. In early 1944, at a time when available Allied intelligence 
              indicated that the Germans might well have attained an advanced 
              stage in the development of atomic weapons, the Military Policy 
              Committee reported to the Top Policy Group that "no espionage 
              activities by the Axis nations with respect to this project have 
              been discovered, although there have been suspicious indications."175

In a project where the ultimate goal depended upon continuous progress 
              in intricate and closely related production processes, unscheduled 
              delays or interruptions of any kind could be disastrous. Sabotage 
              in any form, whether perpetrated by outsiders or insiders bent upon 
              slowing down or disrupting a particular process, constituted an 
              ever- present hazard. Recognizing the seriousness of this threat, 
              Gen. Groves directed that any suspicion of sabotage be reported 
              to him immediately. In keeping with Groves's policy of constant 
              vigilance to detect any hint of sabotage, the District's CIC Detachment 
              thoroughly investigated every instance of mechanical failure, equipment 
              breakdown, fire, accident, or similar occurrence not readily attributable 
              to normal causes, and kept under constant observation all processes 
              and activities that might attract the efforts of saboteurs. In addition, 
              other security personnel regularly inspected the security systems 
              and personnel clearance procedures at the project's various installations, 
              with the objective of detecting and correcting possible weaknesses 
              that might invite sabotage.176 
Illustrative of Groves's policy was the investigation into the 
              mystifying failure of the first great magnets installed in the electromagnetic 
              plant at the Clinton Engineer Works. Following a brief period of 
              operation, the magnets began to malfunction. After disassembling 
              one of the magnets piece by piece, Kellex engineers found that in 
              its oil circulation and cooling system rust and dirt particles were 
              bridging the gaps between the silver bands forming the coil component, 
              which they attributed to the manufacturer's failure to maintain 
              sufficiently rigid standards of cleanliness. The significance of 
              this incident was that it revealed the inherent vulnerability of 
              the electromagnetic installations and the need for constant surveillance 
              in order to thwart possible sabotage.177
Changing of the Guard: Military 
              Police Contingent at CEW.
PHOTO 
              

The district's continuous and thorough efforts to protect the project's 
              installations and operations against sabotage were successful. During 
              the war years, there were no definitely established incidents of 
              sabotage traceable to enemy agents. In most cases where breakdowns 
              or other failures occurred under suspicious circumstances, investi-gations 
              revealed they were probably the result of causes other than enemy 
              sabotage. For example, during construction of the original gaseous 
              diffusion plant at the Tennessee site, inspectors discovered someone 
              had driven nails through the rubber coverings of vital electric 
              cables leading underground from the power plant to the main production 
              plant. The perpetrators of this act were never found, although the 
              evidence indicated strongly it was the work of disgruntled employees.178

A quite different type of interference with plant operation briefly 
              threatened the Hanford Engineer Works in early 1945. Groves reported 
              to the Military Policy Committee in February that Army and Navy 
              intelligence had recorded more than fifty incidents of Japanese 
              balloons at various sites along the Pacific Coast, some of them 
              carrying incendiary and fragmentation bombs. While none of these 
              appears to have been directed specifically against the Hanford installations, 
              on 10 March a balloon of this type struck a high tension transmission 
              line running between the Grand Coulee and Bonneville generating 
              stations and caused an electrical surge through the interconnecting 
              Hanford line that carried power to the production piles. Automatic 
              safety devices at the three piles were activated, briefly shutting 
              down their operation. Fortunately, the bombs attached to the balloon 
              did not explode and the transmission line was not seriously damaged.179


Compartmentalization Policy 
              One of the most unusual duties assigned to the District's CIC Detachment 
              was that of furnishing bodyguards for key Manhattan scientific leaders. 
              CIC personnel accompanied J. Robert Oppenheimer, Ernest Lawrence, 
              Arthur Compton, and Enrico Fermi almost continuously. They accompanied 
              other scientists at intervals, when they were at work on projects 
              that required their special protection. 
Col. Marshall had originated the idea of bodyguards, suggesting 
              that they serve also as drivers, to conceal their true function 
              and to reduce the likelihood of accidents. Compton's bodyguard, 
              a former Chicago policeman, traveled with him in the guise of a 
              special assistant. When Compton was in residence at Oak Ridge, his 
              guard served as a member of the local police force. District security 
              officials exercised considerable care in selecting individuals for 
              bodyguards, seeking those who had demonstrated ability to adapt 
              themselves readily to the kind of situations in which scientists 
              were likely to be involved.180

Even though District security officials had planned and implemented 
              a multifaceted security system to protect all aspects of project 
              operations and developments, they fully realized that maintenance 
              of total secrecy in such a vast project was unlikely. What was more 
              feasible, they believed, was to prevent leakage of any useful knowledge 
              of the program's special scientific concepts, industrial techniques, 
              and military objectives or, in Army parlance, safe-guarding military 
              information."181

Under the provisions of Army security regulations, the basic responsibility 
              for the protection of classified information rested upon "all 
              military personnel, civilian employees of the War Department, and 
              the management and employees of all commercial firms engaged in 
              classified work or projects for the War Department."182 
              In applying this principle to the atomic program, District security 
              officials placed particular emphasis upon limiting the amount of 
              classified information permitted to any single individual or group 
              of individuals. District security regulations established two basic 
              rules, which were to "govern the right to possess classified 
              information;" a person must need the information in order to 
              carry out his job and have access only to the amount of information 
              "necessary for him to execute his function." To make doubly 
              certain an individual employee was restricted to "the minimum 
              necessary for the proper performance of his duties," District 
              regulations further directed that "employees… shall be 
              organized into small working groups or teams so far as possible, 
              each working on its own phase of the job and not being permitted 
              to inspect or discuss the work being done by others."183

This compartmentalization policy became a far more pervasive influence 
              in the project after the Army assumed full responsibility for its 
              administration. Where the OSRD had applied compartmentalization 
              primarily to research and development organizations, the Army incorporated 
              it into virtually every type of activity undertaken by the project. 
              Typical was the District's insistence that production plant blueprints 
              be broken down and distributed in such a way as to reveal as little 
              as possible to any one individual about the overall character of 
              the project. Similarly, the District required that equipment orders 
              to commercial firms specify that an item not be manufactured and 
              assembled at the same location. And when the production plants reached 
              the point of startup operations, plant managers received instructions 
              to split up orders for raw materials among a number of suppliers 
              so that the purpose for which they were being used could not be 
              readily ascertained. 

While project leaders agreed that some compart-mentalization of 
              information was necessary, considerable difference of opinion prevailed 
              on the extent of limiting scientific and technical interchange, 
              both between sections functioning within a laboratory or plant and 
              between the various interrelated installations of the project. Military 
              administrators, in contrast to their civilian counterparts, favored 
              the enforcement of stricter controls. These generally took the form 
              of written agreements covering those organizations and installations 
              that needed to exchange data. The agreements specified in detail 
              how and what information could be interchanged. Inevitably, occasions 
              arose when developments required interchange of classified information 
              not covered in agreements. In such instances, project leaders applied 
              directly to the district engineer or to Gen. Groves for special 
              permission to exchange the data needed.184 

One of the most important interchange arrangements formed occurred 
              in June 1943, when Gen. Groves met with Compton and Oppenheimer 
              for the purpose of establishing "the principles which should 
              govern the interchange of information between the Chicago [Metallurgical 
              Laboratory] and Los Alamos projects.…" As a basic criterion 
              determining what information should be interchanged, they set up 
              the test that only data that would "benefit work at both Chicago 
              and Los Alamos" should be exchanged. The agreement that resulted 
              spelled out, in considerable detail, exactly what information could 
              and could not be interchanged (the latter included those categories 
              relating to production piles, military weapons, and the time schedules 
              of various developments); designated by name those individuals at 
              each installation who were qualified to carry on interchange; and 
              outlined exact procedures of exchange__by formal reports, secret 
              correspondence, or visits and conferences. On the most sensitive 
              matters, or where there was serious doubt about interchange, the 
              only channel of exchange was through a visit to the Chicago laboratory 
              by either Oppenheimer or a specifically designated group leader. 
              Although negotiators of the agreement must have been aware of the 
              generally restrictive character of its provisions, they nevertheless 
              emphasized that its major objective was "to maintain as rapid 
              and effective interchange of information as possible."185

Compartmentalization of information probably aroused more adverse
criticism__both from partici-pants in the atomic program and 
              from some of those who, in retrospect, have reviewed its history__than 
              any other single aspect of the project's security system. Among 
              the participants, the most vociferous critics were the scientists, 
              accustomed to working in college and university laboratories where 
              they could freely interchange the results of their work with scientific 
              colleagues in all parts of the world. Project scientists, such as 
              Leo Szilard, held that over-compartmentalization was a primary cause 
              of extended delays in achievement of scientific and technical objectives 
              of the program. Testifying before a committee of Congress after 
              the war, he asserted, for example, that "compartmentalization 
              of information was the cause for failure to realize that light uranium 
              U235 might be produced in quantities sufficient to make atomic bombs.… 
              We could have had it eighteen months earlier. We did not 
              put two and two together because the two two's were in a 
              different compartment.…"186  On another occasion 
              he contended also that compartmentalization was not really "too 
              successful" because "significant matters gradually leak 
              through anyway."187

Joining Szilard in condemning compartmentalization in the strongest 
              possible terms was Edward U. Condon, the prominent American physicist 
              who had come to the atomic project from the Westinghouse Research 
              Laboratories. In fact, after spending only a month at Los Alamos, 
              Condon came to the conclusion that he would be of more use to the 
              war effort at Westinghouse than at the New Mexico laboratory. The 
              project's security policy, he asserted, had a morbidly depressing 
              effect on him. "I feel so strongly," he continued, "that 
              this policy puts you in the position of trying to do an extremely 
              difficult job with three hands tied behind your back that I cannot 
              accept the view that such internal compart-mentalization is proper."188


Most other contemporary critics took a somewhat less extreme position. 
              Concerned about insufficient interchange of data among atomic project 
              scientists causing delays in the solutions of problems related to 
              bomb development, Compton suggested to the OSRD S-1 Committee in 
              December 1942 that it might be wise to increase the number of "responsible 
              persons who are free of compartmentalization.…"189 
               Similarly, in June 1943, physicist Richard C. Tolman, in 
              his role as Groves's scientific adviser, expressed concern that 
              the "proposed regulations to govern interchange between the 
              Chicago and Los Alamos scientists were perhaps not quite as liberal 
              as may later prove warranted." In the weeks following the institution 
              of these regulations, both Oppenheimer and Edward Teller, who was 
              working on a part-time basis at Los Alamos, were troubled by what 
              they viewed as inadequate liaison channels between the New Mexico 
              laboratory and the other installations where related work was in 
              progress.190

When British officials and scientists came to the United States 
              in late 1942, they were surprised to learn that Gen. Groves planned 
              further compartmentali-zation, which many of them viewed as already 
              having been applied to an extent that made efficient operation impossible. 
              Furthermore, the British soon found that the Americans used the 
              policy as a convenient excuse for withholding information. Thus, 
              the policy became intermeshed with the whole question of interchange 
              with the British, a problem that was resolved only after many months 
              of negotiation.191

By early 1944, most project personnel had come to accept the policy 
              as a fact of life. In looking back after the war was over, even 
              some scientists who had found compartmentalization so distasteful 
              grudgingly conceded it had probably been necessary. The eminent 
              American (German-born) physicist James Franck, for example, while 
              speaking at a conference on atomic energy at the University of Chicago 
              in September 1945, concluded that "so far as secrecy is concerned, 
              the Army officers were unrelenting and, in all honesty, we have 
              to admit that they had to be." But, he went on to remind his 
              listeners that the policy had exacted a "stiff price" 
              in the "wasting of talent and scientific manpower and the loss 
              of precious time."192 

From the military point of view, compart-mentalization was precisely 
              what was required, both for security and for achieving the most 
              efficient functioning of scientists and technologists. As Gen. Groves 
              expressed his conviction in retrospect:

"Compartmentalization of knowledge, to me, was the very heart 
              of security. My style was simple and not capable of misinterpretation__each 
              man should know everything he needed to know to do his job and nothing 
              else. Adherence to this rule not only provided an adequate measure 
              of security, but it greatly improved overall efficiency by making 
              our people stick to their knitting. And it made quite clear to all 
              concerned that the project existed to produce a specific end product—not 
              to enable individuals to satisfy their curiosity and to increase 
              their scientific knowledge."193

The District's policy of compartmentalization of information on 
              the atomic project, in Groves's words, applied "to everyone, 
              including members of the Executive Department, military personnel 
              and members of Congress." No one was to have access "solely 
              by virtue of his commission or official position." Adherence 
              to this policy was possible as long as Manhattan's funding came 
              from sources already earmarked for the War Department. But project 
              leaders anticipated considerable trouble in the future, because 
              securing new funds would entail congressional authorization.194

By early 1944, the compartmentalization policy was becoming less 
              and less feasible with Congress because of the increasing size of 
              the program, its rapidly rising cost, and the need to begin planning 
              for its postwar administration. Under the original directive from 
              the President, the atomic program obtained funds from the money 
              appropriated under the Engineer Service-Army budgetary category. 
              Funds from this source sufficed as long as Manhattan's budgets remained 
              relatively modest. But when project leaders estimated that the program 
              would need at least $600 million for fiscal year (FY) 1945, they 
              decided they would have to find a way to provide some information 
              to selected members of Congress who had a need to know. They consulted 
              with President Roosevelt, who thereupon directed that Stimson, Bush, 
              and Gen. Marshall brief the leaders of both parties in the House 
              and the Senate.195

On l8 February, Stimson, Bush, and Marshall went to the office 
              of Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn, where they were joined by Majority 
              Leader John W. McCormack and Minority Leader Joseph W. Martin, Jr. 
              Stimson outlined the history of the atomic project, including its 
              cost to date and estimated the total amount needed to complete it; 
              Bush described the project's scientific background and indicated 
              the likely destructive power of an atomic weapon; and Marshall discussed 
              the potential role of atomic bombs in the Allied strategy for winning 
              the war. The legislators pledged their unreserved support, stating 
              that they viewed its high cost as well worth the price. They promised 
              to work out a system for handling the Manhattan appropriations in 
              committee so that there would be no danger of disclosure of their 
              purpose. Bush found that the "entire meeting was most reassuring, 
              as it was quite evident the three congressmen were exceedingly anxious 
              to be of aid to the War Department in carrying a very heavy responsibility."196


In June, Stimson, Bush, and Maj. Gen. George J. Richards, the War 
              Department budget officer who was substituting for Marshall while 
              he was out of town, repeated the briefing for the leaders of the 
              Senate. Present were Majority Leader Alben W. Barkley and Minority 
              Leader Wallace H. White, as well as Chairman Elmer Thomas and Senior 
              Minority Member Styles Bridges of the military subcommittee of the 
              Senate Appropriations Committee. Stimson recalled that "the 
              four gentlemen who met with us were very much impressed. They promised 
              that they would help and keep absolute silence about it and prevent 
              discussion in public as to what it was about."197

During the remaining months of 1944, congressional leaders succeeded 
              in keeping the vast majority of the members of Congress ignorant 
              of the atomic project. Accustomed to wartime restrictions, most 
              members were willing to accept—without protest—the assurance 
              of their leaders that the work was secret and that the needed appropriations 
              were essential to the war effort. But for a few members this policy 
              was unacceptable, and they directed individual inquiries to the 
              War Department about rumored developments at the atomic sites.

A case in point was Congressman Albert J. Engel of Michigan, a 
              member of the House Appropriations Committee, who in February 1945 
              was unwilling to accept automatically the War Department's request 
              for FY 1946 funding from money appropriated under the Expediting 
              Production budgetary category. In a visit to Under Secretary Patterson 
              on the 24th, the Michigan representative stated that he had heard 
              rumors of extravagance and waste and that he wanted more information 
              before approving the War Department's FY 1946 funds. Remembering 
              that in late 1943 War Department officials had dissuaded him from 
              making a proposed trip to the Clinton site, this time he firmly 
              insisted that Patterson allow him to inspect the atomic installations. 
              When Stimson heard from Patterson of Engel's insistence upon visiting 
              project facilities, he sought assistance from the leaders of the 
              House of Representatives. As Speaker Rayburn was away, Stimson turned 
              to Congressman John Taber of New York, another member of the Appropriations 
              Committee. He and Taber sat down with Engel and persuaded him to 
              forgo objections to funds on the floor of the House, but only after 
              promising him an opportunity to visit some "outside installations" 
              of the project.198

This experience convinced the Secretary of War and the Manhattan 
              commander, as well as other project leaders, that more and more 
              members of Congress would be demanding current information about 
              Manhattan's activities. Consequently, they arranged to have a selected 
              delegation from each House visit Clinton and, if they wished, also 
              Hanford. With the President's approval for this plan, Groves and 
              Stimson, accompanied by the Secretary's aide, Col. William H. Kyle, 
              visited Clinton on 10 April to prepare "for future trouble 
              with Congressmen."199

Upon the unexpected death of Roosevelt on the twelfth, the inspection 
              trip to Clinton was delayed, but only temporarily. In May, after 
              President Truman had given his assent, Speaker Rayburn helped select 
              five members from the House Appropriations Committee—Clarence 
              Cannon, the chairman, George H. Mahon, J. Buell Snyder, Engel, and 
              Taber. Under the careful guidance of the Manhattan commander and 
              the district engineer, the five congressmen spent two days inspecting 
              the Clinton Engineer Works. The legislators returned to Washington 
              convinced that public funds had been well spent and prepared to 
              support the project's budgetary requests for FY 1946. A visit by 
              a comparable Senate delegation to inspect atomic facilities was 
              not feasible until after V- J Day, when a group from the upper house 
              toured the Hanford Engineer Works.200 

Administrative Aspects 
              As security requirements increased, the Army established a variety 
              of units to administer its highly compartmentalized information 
              security program. By necessity, the program from about late 1942 
              up until the District's major intelligence and security reorganization 
              in early 1944 was limited in scope. Faced with a rapid influx of 
              new personnel, both civilian and military, the District's Protective 
              Security Section concentrated chiefly on developing ways for instructing 
              them in the meaning of classified information and the correct methods 
              for handling it. To facilitate this education process, the small 
              staff hurriedly prepared and distributed a manual that provided 
              a "statement of District policy regarding Protective Security 
              procedures," including an extensive section on safeguarding 
              classified information.201

An intensification of protective measures during the first half 
              of 1943 resulted in the establishment in August of the Plant Security 
              Section for Safeguarding Military Information (SMI). In an effort 
              to assure attainment of the desired security objectives, the SMI 
              staff developed a new intelligence bulletin. This bulletin, issued 
              in November, set forth in detail the requirements and procedures 
              for safeguarding military information, emphasizing that "matters 
              of vital importance to the government must be protected at all times 
              whether at war or at peace…and thus great caution must be exercised 
              in the handling and in the dissemination of all information—written 
              or oral—relative to this Project at any time."202


By early 1944, consolidation of the District's intelligence and 
              security facilities opened the way for a more comprehensive information 
              security program and the establishment in May of a separate SMI 
              Section (redesignated SMI Branch in 1945, when organizationally 
              restructured as a subordinate unit of the District's Intelligence 
              and Security Division). Under the expanded program, security officials 
              launched studies of all aspects of the atomic project— equipment, 
              material, products, processes, operations, administrative matters—to 
              determine the appropriate classification for their mention in correspondence 
              and other documents. They set up codenames (some already in use) 
              for major sites, important materials, items of equipment, and even 
              for the more widely known scientists working on the project. Under 
              this scheme, for example, Los Alamos became Site Y., plutonium became 
              94, the implosion bomb became Fat Man, and scientist Arthur I. Compton 
              became A. H. Comas. Using the staff and resources of the SMI Section, 
              District authorities directed attention to those areas where security 
              leaks were most likely to occur. Thus, the section regularly reviewed 
              project correspondence with other government agencies, such as the 
              Selective Service concerning deferment of key personnel, and advised 
              on the security classification that should govern each of the thousands 
              of contracts that the District negotiated with outside individuals 
              and firms.203

The establishment and maintenance of effective adherence to security 
              requirements among the project's thousands of contractor organizations 
              comprised one of the most challenging and complex aspects of the 
              information security program. District authorities oversaw contractors' 
              security activities through several channels. The branch intelligence 
              offices in principal cities throughout the United States provided 
              a convenient point of contact, and periodic checks of contractor 
              facilities and operations by security inspectors from District headquarters 
              constituted a second avenue of control. These inspectors particularly 
              observed methods of handling classified materials and storing documents. 
              District security officials also investigated contractors' personnel 
              recruitment programs, written correspon-dence, stock registration 
              statements to the Securities and Exchange Commission, and similar 
              activities in which security leaks were likely to occur. Finally, 
              when a contractor terminated his contract with the atomic program, 
              District security officials made certain that all classified materials 
              were returned to project control or that the contractor provided 
              for their adequate protection.204

Security problems involving firms under contract most frequently 
              arose where these organizations were carrying out large-scale development 
              of project facilities. Such development, as at the Clinton and Hanford 
              sites, inevitably brought overcrowding of local housing, acute labor 
              shortages, greatly increased road traffic, and other adverse changes 
              that placed a severe strain on normal community activities. The 
              resulting public resentment, generally focused on the contractor 
              firms, created an environment in which threats to security were 
              more likely to occur. In the spring of 1943, for example, Du Pont's 
              effort to arrange for housing and other facilities for the thousands 
              of employees who would work on the Hanford project stirred up resentment 
              in surrounding communities, already aroused by the Army's land acquisition 
              program. The spread of rumors, adverse criticism in the local newspapers, 
              and unfounded statements by local officials tended to draw widespread 
              public attention to the project, posing a serious threat to security. 
              Lt. Col. Franklin T. Matthias, the Hanford area engineer, and members 
              of his staff spoke at meetings of service clubs in communities adjacent 
              to the project, in an endeavor to counter the rumors and misinformation 
              concerning Du Pont's role in the project. By these and similar efforts 
              they laid the groundwork for obtaining the support and good will 
              of the local citizenry—an absolute essential to maintaining 
              the security of the project.205

Efforts to maintain good community relations was an important aspect 
              of the District's information security program, which had as its 
              prime objective the forestalling of security breaks, first by anticipating 
              them and second by teaching project personnel how to be "instinctively 
              alert-minded and security-wise." Although the SMI Section had 
              primary responsibility for carrying out the program, employee education 
              in security matters devolved chiefly to the SMI staffs at the branch 
              intelligence polices. Each staff, for example, conducted orientation 
              and refresher sessions for Corps of Engineers personnel; provided 
              each contractor with instructional materials for in-house security 
              education briefings for its personnel; and used a variety of media—training 
              films, circulars and handbills, payroll inserts, telephone stickers, 
              and editorials in project newspapers—to remind District employees 
              of the importance of unremitting attention to the demands of security.206

Because of the policy of compartmentalization, the quantity and 
              variety of educational subject matter available for training purposes 
              was limited. Most workers had knowledge of only the project activity 
              under way at the site where they were employed and most generally 
              did not even know exactly what was being made in the facility where 
              they worked. And even in some instances, project officials had concocted 
              for employees—those working at the elec-tromagnetic plant—a 
              plausible but inaccurate and misleading explanation of the process 
              involved and the product produced, with the warning that this information 
              was given to them only to help them carry out their jobs. Lacking 
              concrete data on which to base an appeal to employees, security 
              officials had to request that they accept the necessity for strict 
              adherence to secrecy largely on faith and out of a sense of patriotism 
              and loyalty to the men on the fighting fronts. 

As did most wartime agencies involved in secret work, the Manhattan 
              District resorted to censorship of various kinds as a means of safeguarding 
              classified information. In the first few months after the Army assumed 
              responsibility for the atomic program, the District and branch security 
              staffs began a cursory review of a few leading daily newspapers 
              and periodicals and gradually enlarged this check of publications 
              until it covered some 370 newspapers and 70 magazines. The censors, 
              several of whom were Women's Army Corps members, were particularly 
              on the lookout for publication of anything that would reveal classified 
              information, attract attention to the project, or furnish an enemy 
              agent or anyone else with knowledge sufficient to determine the 
              nature of the project.207

While review of newspapers, periodicals, and other publications 
              provided some protection against damaging revelations about the 
              project, the fact remained that once such information appeared in 
              print an element of secrecy was lost. Much more effective was a 
              system that prevented publication of sensitive information. Under 
              the Office of Censorship's "Codes of Wartime Practices for 
              the American Press and American Broadcasters," newspapers, 
              periodicals, and radio broadcasters voluntarily agreed to refrain 
              from discussing certain specified subjects and mentioning certain 
              terms. In February 1943, Vannevar Bush proposed that the atomic 
              energy program be brought under this voluntary censorship. At first, 
              both Gen. Strong, the Army intelligence chief, and Gen. Groves had 
              serious reservations about making the atomic energy project subject 
              to this censorship arrangement, fearing that the results "might 
              be more detrimental than otherwise."208

Finally, military leaders reluctantly agreed to the voluntary press 
              censorship plan, persuaded primarily by the insistence of Nathaniel 
              R. Howard, assistant director of the Office of Censorship and a 
              former editor of the Cleveland News, that this was the only 
              way to maintain press security of the project. On 28 June 1943, 
              Byron Price, director of the Office of Censorship, sent out a special 
              request to all editors and broadcasters that they extend the previously 
              issued precaution not to publish or broadcast anything about "new 
              or secret military weapons or experiments" to include:



Production or utilization of atom smashing, atomic energy, 
                atomic fission, atomic splitting, or any of their equivalents. 
                 
The use for military purposes of radium or radioactive materials, 
                heavy water, high voltage discharge equipment, cyclotrons. 
The following elements or any of their compounds: plutonium, 
                uranium, ytterbium, hafnium, protoactinium, radium, thorium, deuterium.209


The aim of censorship was to prevent all mention of the atomic 
              program in the American press; however, on the advice of the Office 
              of Censorship, the District permitted a limited amount of information 
              about certain aspects of the project to appear in newspapers 
              published in communities near the Clinton and Hanford sites. Office 
              of Censorship officials pointed out that complete suppression of 
              information about activities at these locations would actually draw 
              more attention than a policy of judicious release of news of local 
              interest, carefully controlled so as not to reveal any vital secrets. 
              They cited as an example the land acquisition at Hanford, which 
              required relocation of many people and resulted in court proceedings. 
              Stories on these events in newspapers of the Washington-Oregon region 
              would not violate essential security as long as they did not reveal 
              the purpose of the acquisition or the interconnection of the Hanford 
              project with other parts of the atomic program. Gen. Groves assented 
              to this policy but took the added precaution, suggested by Office 
              of Censorship officials, of having Manhattan District representatives 
              visit the editors or publishers of local newspapers and operators 
              of local radio stations to request their cooperation in maintaining 
              the security of the project.210

At Los Alamos, security authorities endeavored to keep all mention 
              of the site and its activities out of the press. Total exclusion 
              was more feasible at the New Mexico installation because of its 
              military administration and geographic isolation from surrounding 
              communities. The policy was reinforced in late 1943 through the 
              use of regular mail censorship and other measures to minimize the 
              likelihood that knowledge of the site would come to the attention 
              of the press.211 

It was inevitable that a voluntary censorship system would not 
              be totally effective, and, on those occasions when some reference 
              to the project or atomic energy occurred in the press or on the 
              radio, the District Security Office and the Office of Censorship 
              took immediate steps to limit its circulation and to run down it 
              origins. A rash of censorship violations occurred in late 1943. 
              A columnist in the Washington Post announced that the Senate's 
              Truman Committee was about to investigate a "half-a-billion 
              dollar" War Department project in the state of Washington that 
              was "reported to be one of the largest single projects that's 
              to be built From scratch in the Nation's history." On the same 
              day the Post article appeared in the Spokane Spokesman 
              Review, and soon thereafter the wire services picked up the 
              news item. Almost simultaneously, several newspapers in Tennessee 
              ran a story on the state's Selective Service that contained a passing 
              reference by the head of the service, Brig. Gen. Thomas A. Frazier, 
              to " the Clinton Engineer Works in secret war production of 
              a weapon that possibly might be the one to end the war." In 
              both instances, prompt action by the Office of Censorship led to 
              withdrawal of the articles before they had received wide circulation. 
              Subsequent action by the War Department resulted in tracing down 
              the sources of the leaks and in implementing improved security measures 
              to prevent such occurrences in the future.212
 


Poster used by isolationists 
              to maintain the US policy of 
              neutrality at the beginning of World War II.
PHOTO 
              

 






END 
              OF CHAPTER 1


Chapter 
                  1
Chapter 
                  2
Chapter 
                  3
Chapter 
                  4
Main




 










 









