



Emmy Noether: Biography, Theory & Contributions to Math | Study.com













































for Teachers
for Schools
for Working Scholars®
for College Credit


























Log In


Sign Up

Menu
					










									Plans
							



									Subjects
							





Art


Business


Computer Science


Education & Teaching


English


Health & Medicine


History


Humanities


Math


Psychology


Science


Social Science







							 
						



									Art
							



									Architecture 




									Art History 




									Design 




									Performing Arts 




									Visual Arts 






							 
						



									Business
							



									Accounting 




									Business Administration 




									Business Communication 




									Business Ethics 




									Business Intelligence 




									Business Law 




									Economics 




									Finance 




									Healthcare Administration 




									Human Resources 




									Information Technology 




									International Business 




									Operations Management 




									Real Estate 




									Sales & Marketing 






							 
						



									Computer Science
							



									Computer Engineering 




									Computer Programming 




									Cybersecurity 




									Data Science 




									Software 






							 
						



									Education & Teaching
							



									Education Law & Policy 




									Pedagogy & Teaching Strategies 




									Special & Specialized Education 




									Student Support in Education 




									Teaching English Language Learners 






							 
						



									English
							



									Grammar 




									Literature 




									Public Speaking 




									Reading 




									Vocabulary 




									Writing & Composition 






							 
						



									Health & Medicine
							



									Counseling & Therapy 




									Health 




									Medicine 




									Nursing 




									Nutrition 






							 
						



									History
							



									US History 




									World History 






							 
						



									Humanities
							



									Communication 




									Ethics 




									Foreign Languages 




									Philosophy 




									Religious Studies 






							 
						



									Math
							



									Algebra 




									Basic Math 




									Calculus 




									Geometry 




									Statistics 




									Trigonometry 






							 
						



									Psychology
							



									Clinical & Abnormal Psychology 




									Cognitive Science 




									Developmental Psychology 




									Educational Psychology 




									Organizational Psychology 




									Social Psychology 






							 
						



									Science
							



									Anatomy & Physiology 




									Astronomy 




									Biology 




									Chemistry 




									Earth Science 




									Engineering 




									Environmental Science 




									Physics 






							 
						



									Social Science
							



									Anthropology 




									Criminal Justice 




									Geography 




									Law 




									Linguistics 




									Political Science 




									Sociology 







									Courses
							





By Subject


By Education Level


Adult Education


Transferable Credit







							By Subject
						



									Arts 




									Business 




									Computer Science 




									Education & Teaching 




									English (ELA) 




									Foreign Language 




									Health & Medicine 




									History 




									Humanities 




									Math 




									Psychology 




									Science 




									Social Science 






							By Education Level
						



									Elementary School 




									Middle School 




									High School 




									College 




									Graduate and Post-Grad 







									Test Prep
							





Teacher Certification Exams


Nursing Exams


Allied Health & Medicine Exams


Real Estate Exams


All Test Prep







							 
						



									Teacher Certification Exams
							



									Praxis 




									FTCE 




									TExES 




									CSET & CBEST 




									More Teacher Certification Test Prep 






							 
						



									Nursing Exams
							



									NCLEX 




									HESI 




									More Nursing Test Prep 






							 
						



									Allied Health & Medicine Exams
							



									ASCP 




									CNA 




									CNS 




									More Medical Test Prep 






							 
						



									Real Estate Exams
							



									Real Estate Sales 




									Real Estate Brokers 




									Real Estate Appraisals 







									Teach
							





Teaching Resources and Curriculum


Skills Practice


Lesson Plans


Teacher Certification


Teacher Professional Development








									Tutoring
							





Math Tutoring


Science Tutoring


Business Tutoring


Humanities Tutoring







							 
						



									Math Tutoring
							



									Algebra  Tutoring




									Calculus  Tutoring




									Geometry  Tutoring




									Pre-calculus  Tutoring




									Statistics  Tutoring




									Trigonometry  Tutoring






							 
						



									Science Tutoring
							



									Biology  Tutoring




									Chemistry  Tutoring




									Physics  Tutoring






							 
						



									Business Tutoring
							



									Accounting  Tutoring




									Economics  Tutoring




									Finance  Tutoring






							 
						



									Humanities Tutoring
							



									History  Tutoring




									Literature  Tutoring




									Writing  Tutoring






Sign Up

































 History Courses
			
			/
			
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	

	
	
	
		
		
		
		
		
			
Important People in World History Study Guide
Course




		Emmy Noether: Biography, Theory & Contributions to Math
	





Instructor

Betsy Chesnutt

Show bio
Betsy has a Ph.D. in biomedical engineering from the University of Memphis, M.S. from the University of Virginia, and B.S. from Mississippi State University. She has over 10 years of experience developing STEM curriculum and teaching physics, engineering, and biology. 







							Emmy Noether (1882-1935) was a German mathematician who helped to expand the study of abstract algebra in the early twentieth century.  In this lesson, learn about her struggles to become a mathematician and the many contributions she made.
						
					





		Create an account
		




Table of ContentsEarly Life and Education Early Research Noether's Theorem Immigration to America Lesson SummaryShow 





Early Life and Education



In Erlangen, Germany, around the beginning of the twentieth century, a young woman named Emmy Noether decided to break the rules. She had grown up in Erlangen, where her father worked as a mathematician and professor of mathematics at the University of Erlangen. As a child, she had studied languages, music, and other subjects deemed appropriate for young German ladies of the time. However, now she was eighteen, and she wanted something different. She wanted to enroll in mathematics classes at the University of Erlangen, where her brother was also a student. She applied to the university, but her application was denied! It wasn't because she was unqualified. It was because she was a woman, and the university did not admit female students. 
Despite the fact that she was a woman, Noether was determined to study mathematics like her father and brother, and she wasn't about to let the University of Erlangen's outdated rules stop her. The university finally agreed to allow her to audit some mathematics classes, even though they would not award her any credit for them. For the next two years, she attended classes at the University of Erlangen and proved that she was as good as any of the other students when she passed a very difficult mathematics exam given to prospective graduate students. Armed with this hard evidence of her mathematical abilities, Noether attended graduate mathematics classes at the University of Gottingen for a year and then transferred back to the University of Erlangen when they finally began admitting female students in 1904. After four years of trying to prove herself, Emmy Noether was finally a full-time Ph.D. student in mathematics.  

   Emmy Noether made many contributions to the development of abstract algebra in the early twentieth century 
 





 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account











									Lesson
							



									Quiz
								



									Course
								



						














	
	
							5.2K
							views






Early Research



When she graduated with a Ph.D. in mathematics in 1907, things did not get any easier for her. She was unable to find a paying job as a mathematician because women were not expected or allowed to pursue such careers at the time. Undeterred, she worked for several years at the Mathematical Institute of Erlangen for free, without any kind of title or recognition. She helped her father with his work there but also began to pursue her own research. She began to collaborate with the famous mathematician Ernst Otto Fischer, and she became increasingly interested in abstract algebra. It was in this area of mathematics that she would go on to make her most important and substantial contributions.  

   Noether often sent postcards to her collaborator Ernst Fischer, filled with her ideas about abstract algebra. 
 





 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account












Noether's Theorem



In 1915, two mathematicians working at the University of Gottingen, Felix Klein and David Hilbert, were trying to refine the mathematics of Einstein's Theory of Relativity. When they realized that they needed help, they turned to Noether. They asked her to join them in Gottingen, and she agreed. Even though she was still not being paid, her status had improved somewhat because her name was now recognized in the world of mathematics. 
Hilbert and Klein's faith in Noether's abilities was not misplaced. In a very short time, she came up with a new theorem, now known as Noether's theorem, that demonstrated that there was a clear relationship between quantities that were conserved in physics (such as energy and momentum) and physical symmetries in the system being analyzed. Einstein was impressed with her work right away, saying that Noether's theorem was a piece of ''penetrating mathematical thinking.'' Over the years, it has proven to be useful in many areas of theoretical physics and not just applicable to the theory of relativity. After her huge success with Noether's theorem, Emmy Noether was finally given a position as a lecturer at the University of Gottingen in 1919, and in 1922, she even began receiving a small salary! Throughout the 1920's, Noether continued to work on new mathematical theories, especially in the area of abstract algebra. At the time, her work was somewhat controversial because it was so abstract, but now, it has been shown to be useful in many applied subjects, like physics and crystallography. 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Immigration to America



In the early 1930's, life again became extremely difficult for Noether. As a feminist, pacifist, Jew and member of the Social Democratic Party, she was not able to safely remain in Germany after the rise of Hitler and the Nazi party. In 1933, she was able to get a position as a visiting professor of mathematics at Bryn Mawr College in the United States, and she left Germany forever. She continued to teach and work for the next two years but died suddenly in 1935 from complications after a surgical procedure. In her lifetime, she published over 40 papers and inspired countless students. She is remembered as one of the most important mathematicians of the twentieth century, even though she had to fight for the right to even BE a mathematician for most of her career. Speaking of Emmy Noether not long after her death, Albert Einstein said, '''Noether was the most significant creative mathematical genius thus far produced since the higher education of women began.'' 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Lesson Summary



Emmy Noether (1882-1935) was a German mathematician famous for her work in abstract algebra. In her career, she worked as a researcher and teacher, publishing over 40 papers and teaching at several different universities, including the University of Gottingen and Bryn Mawr University. She is most famous for developing Noether's theorem, which has proven to be enormously useful in theoretical physics.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account












Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?


				I am a student
			

 I am a teacher
			



Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 30 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In

 Back
					


Resources created by teachers for teachers
Over 30,000 video lessons
		& teaching resources‐all
		in one place.
	






Video lessons





Quizzes & Worksheets





Classroom Integration





Lesson Plans



I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues. It’s like a teacher waved a magic wand and did the work for me. I feel like it’s a lifeline.



			Jennifer B.
		

				Teacher
				
				
			

































    
    
		Try it now
	




 Back
	











		Start today. Try it now
		








Important People in World History Study Guide


12 chapters |
				
					
					
						207 lessons
						
					
				
			






Ch 1. 
									
										Important Religious Figures in...










Ch 2. 
									
										Famous Philosophers










Ch 3. 
									
										Important Scientists, Inventors &...










Ch 4. 
									
										U.S. Political & Revolutionary...










Ch 5. 
									
										Famous European & African...










Ch 6. 
									
										Famous Asian & Russian World...










Ch 7. 
									
										Important Artists & Literary Figures in...










Ch 8. 
									
										Important Engineers in History










Ch 9. 
									
										Important Inventors in History










Ch 10. 
              Important Mathematicians in History






							Leonardo Fibonacci | Biography, Works & Legacy
					

							  










4:24
						 



							Daniel Bernoulli Biography: Lesson for Kids
					



							Daniel Bernoulli | Biography, Contributions & Accomplishments
					



							Ada Lovelace | Biography, Quotes & Legacy
					



							Ada Lovelace: Accomplishments & Invention
					



							Charles Babbage's Biography, Inventions & Significance
					



							Emmy Noether: Biography, Theory & Contributions to Math
					





							  










5:50
						 
Next Lesson






Srinivasa Ramanujan: Inventions, Books & Achievements




							Srinivasa Ramanujan | Biography, Facts & Legacy
					

							  










5:40
						 



							Leonhard Euler | Biography & Contributions to Math
					



							John Napier of Merchiston | Facts & Contributions to Mathematics
					



							Christiaan Huygens: Biography, Facts & Discoveries
					



							Maria Gaetana Agnesi: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Maria Gaetana Agnesi | Biography, Accomplishments & Death
					



							Pierre Simon Laplace | Biography, Contributions & Achievements
					



							Willard Gibbs: Biography & Quotes
					



							Willard Gibbs: Discoveries & Accomplishments
					



							William Thomson's Plum Pudding Model | Overview & Contributions
					



							David Hilbert's Biography, Accomplishments & Significance
					



							Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar: Discovery, Inventions & Contributions
					



							Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar: Biography & Quotes
					



							Thabit ibn Qurra | Biography, Legacy & Contributions
					



							Pierre de Fermat: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Pierre de Fermat's Life, Mathematical Discoveries & Legacy
					



							Ronald Fisher | Biography, Publication & Accomplishments
					

							  










6:40
						 







Ch 11. 
									
										Important Philosophers in...










Ch 12. 
									
										Leaders in Ancient History












Emmy Noether: Biography, Theory & Contributions to Math Related Study Materials




Related Topics






Browse by Courses
History 101: Western Civilization I
AP World History: Exam Prep
AP European History: Exam Prep
History 106: The Civil War and Reconstruction
World History: High School
AP European History: Help and Review
AP European History: Homework Help Resource
NY Regents Exam - US History and Government: Test Prep & Practice
NY Regents Exam - Global History and Geography: Test Prep & Practice
Middle School US History: Homework Help Resource
AP European History: Tutoring Solution
AP World History: Help and Review
SAT Subject Test US History: Practice and Study Guide
High School World History: Tutoring Solution
History 103: US History I






Browse by Lessons
The Quest of The Golden Fleece | Summary & Analysis
Ubaid Period Culture, Pottery & Statues
4th Century BCE | Timeline, Major Kingdoms & Innovations
Slaves of Rome | Origins, Life & Treatment
Lycurgus of Sparta | Life, Laws & Reforms
Athena, the Greek Goddess of Wisdom | Mythology & Significance
14th Century Art | Overview, Paintings & Themes
King Henry IV of France | Biography & Death
King David of Israel | Overview, Story & Facts
Royal Tombs Of Ur: Definition & Treasures
What is a Megaron? - Definition & Architecture
Adeimantus of Collytus | Overview, History & Representation
Hector of Troy in Greek Mythology | Overview & History
Orestes of Alexandria:  Mythology, Overview
Eos, the Greek Goddess of the Dawn | Mythology, Symbols & Legacy














				Create an account to start this course today
			

						  
							  Used by over 30 million students worldwide
						  
						  
                


				  Create an account
		













Like this lesson



Share




Explore our library of over 88,000 lessons


Search











Browse


						Browse by subject
					


College Courses

Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses



High School Courses

AP
Common Core
GED

High School
See All High School Courses



Other Courses

College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses













Upgrade to enroll
×


Upgrade to Premium to enroll in Important People in World History Study Guide
Enrolling in a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams.




Track course progress




Take quizzes and exams




Earn certificates of completion



			You will also be able to:
			
Create a Goal
Create custom courses
Get your questions answered




Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!

			Upgrade Now
		
Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!











Download the app




























Plans

Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars® Solutions



About Us

Blog
Careers
Teach For Us
Press Center
Ambassador
Scholarships





Support

FAQ
Site Feedback



Download the app
























Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community








©  Copyright 2024 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		





Terms of Use  
Privacy Policy  
DMCA Notice  
ADA Compliance  
Honor Code For Students


















×








