

 

Emmy Noether





Biographies of Women Mathematicians


Home | 
Alphabetical Index | 
Chronological Index | 
Resources | 
Credits | 
Search



Emmy Noether



March 23, 1882 - April 14, 1935


Written by Mandie Taylor, Class of 1998 (Agnes Scott College)

Traditionally, people consider mathematicians to be men. This, however, is 
not entirely true. Throughout history, there have been many women 
mathematicians who have contributed just as much as their 
male-counterparts. Even though their names might have been forgotten, 
their contributions to mathematics have not. One of these women 
mathematicians was German-born Emmy Noether.

Emmy Noether was born in Erlangen, Germany on March 23, 1882. She was 
named Amalie, but always called "Emmy". She was the eldest of four 
children, but one of only two that survived childhood. Her brother, Fritz 
also made a career of mathematics. Her father was Max Noether, a noted 
mathematician of his time. Her mother was Ida Amalie, for whom Emmy was 
named.

As a child, Emmy Noether did not concentrate on mathematics. She spent her 
time in school studying languages, with a concentration on French and 
English. Her mother taught her the traditional skills of a young woman of 
that time. She learned to cook, clean, and play the clavier. At the time 
of her graduation from high school, she passed a test that allowed her to 
teach both French and English at schools for young women.

At the age of 18, Emmy Noether decided to take classes in mathematics at 
the University of Erlangen. Her brother, Fritz, was a student there, and 
her father was a professor of mathematics. Because she was a woman, the 
university refused to let Emmy Noether take classes They granted her 
permission to audit classes. She sat in on classes for two years, and then 
took the exam that would permit her to be a doctoral student in 
mathematics. She passed the test, and finally was a student in good 
standing at the University. After five more years of study, she was 
granted the second degree to a woman in the field of mathematics. The 
first graduated a year earlier.

Now that Emmy Noether had her doctorate in mathematics, she was ready to 
find a job teaching. The University of Erlangen would not hire her, as 
they had a policy against women professors. She decided to help her father 
at the Mathematics Institute in Erlangen. She began doing research there, 
and helped her father by teaching his classes when he was sick. Soon, she 
began to publish papers on her work.

During the ten years Emmy worked with her father, Germany became involved 
in World War I. Emmy was a pacifist at heart, and hated the war. She 
longed for a Germany that was not at war. In 1918, her wish was granted, 
as the war ended. The German monarchy was removed and the country became a 
republic. Noether, and all women in Germany, were given the right to vote 
for the first time. Even with the new rights granted to women, Noether was 
not paid for her work teaching.

During this time, Felix Klein and David Hilbert were working on further 
defining one of Einstein's theories at the University of Gottingen. They 
felt that Emmy Noether's expertise could help them in their work. They 
asked her to come and join then, but since there were no women on the 
faculty, Noether was unsure if she would be welcome. Many of the faculty 
did not want her there, but in the end, she came. She worked hard and soon 
was given a job as a lecturer. Even though she still was not paid for her 
efforts, for the first time, Noether was teaching under her own name. 
Three years later, she began receiving a small salary for her work.

During her time at the University of Gottingen, she accumulated a small 
following of students known as Noether's boys. These students traveled 
from as far as Russia to study with her. Noether was a warm person who 
cared deeply about her students. She considered her students to be like 
family and was always willing to listen to their problems. Her teaching 
style was very difficult to follow, but those who caught on to her fast 
style became loyal followers. Noether's teaching method led her students 
to come up with ideas of their own, and many went on to become great 
mathematicians themselves. Many credited Noether for her part in teaching 
them to teach themselves.

Peace-loving Noether was soon to wish for peace again. In 1933, Hitler and 
the Nazis came into power in Germany. The Nazis demanded that all Jews be 
thrown out of the universities. Noether's brother, Fritz, was also a 
professor at the time. Offered a teaching position in Siberia, he moved 
his family there. Even though friends tried to get Emmy a position at the 
University of Moscow, she opted to move to the United States, where Bryn 
Mawr College offered her a position teaching. The appointment of Noether was made possible by a gift from the Institute of International Education and the Rockefeller Foundation.

Emmy Noether taught at Bryn Mawr College until her death in 1935. Teaching 
at a women's college was very different for Noether. For the first time, 
she had colleagues that were women. Anna Pell Wheeler, another woman 
mathematician, was the head of the department at Bryn Mawr, and became a 
great friend of Noether. Wheeler understood about how Emmy had to struggle 
to have a career in mathematics in Germany, and about being uprooted from 
her homeland. Noether was still a caring and compassionate teacher. She 
kept up her charismatic teaching style, often lapsing into German if she 
was having trouble getting her ideas across to the students. Noether's 
death in 1935 surprised nearly everyone, as she had told only her closest 
friends of her illness.

Emmy Noether made many contributions to the field of mathematics. She 
spent her time studying abstract algebra, with special attention to rings, 
groups, and fields. Because of her unique look on topics, she was able to 
see relationships that traditional algebra experts could not. She 
published over 40 papers in her lifetime. She was also a teacher who was 
able to inspire her students to make their own contributions to the field 
of mathematics.

April, 1995

References

Angier, Natalie. "The Mighty Mathematician You've Never Heard Of," New York Times Science section, page D4, March 27, 2012 (print edition). Available online March 26, 2012.
Noether, Gottfried. "Emmy Noether," in Women of Mathematics, A 
	Biobibliographic Sourcebook, Louise Grinstein and Paul Campbell, 
	Editors, Greenwood Press, 1987.
Noether, Emiliana Pasca. "Emmy Noether," in Complexities: Women in Mathematics, Bettye Anne Case and Anne Leggett, Editors, Princeton University Press (2005), 30-37.
Morrow, James. "Emmy Noether," in Notable Women in Mathematics: A Biographical Dictionary, Charlene Morrow and Teri Perl, Editors, Greenwood Press (1998), 152-157.
Olsen, Lynn M. Women in Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 1974.
Perl, Teri. Women in Mathematics, Lives of Women Mathematicians, plus 
Discovery Activities, World Wide Publishing, 1993.
Slachman, Virginia. Portraits for Classroom Bulletin Boards - Woman 
Mathematicians, Dale Seymour Publications, 1990.

Noether, Emiliana P. "Emmy Noether: Twentieth Century Mathematician and Woman," AWM Newsletter, Vol. 6, No. 7 (Nov.-Dec. 1976), 1-6.
Smith, Martha K. "Emmy Noether's Contributions to Mathematics," AWM Newsletter, Vol. 6, No. 7 (Nov.-Dec. 1976), 6-10.
Kimberling, C. "Emmy Noether," American Mathematical Monthly 79 (1972), 136-149. [JSTOR, subscription required]
 
Keating, Stephanie. "The curious case of Noether's theorems," Inside the Perimeter blog, March 22, 2019.
Kimberling, C. "Emmy Noether and her influence," in Emmy Noether: A 
Tribute to her Life and Work, James W. Brewer and Martha K. Smith, 
Editors, M. Dekker, New York, 1981.
Kimberling, C. "Emmy Noether, Greatest Woman Mathematician," Mathematics Teacher 84 no. 3 (March 1982), 246-249. (Available at the Houghton Mifflin web site http://www.matharticles.com under section 10.1 in the drop down menus.)
Srinivasan B. and J. Sally. Emmy Noether in Bryn Mawr: Proceedings
of a Symposium, Springer-Verlag, 1983. 
Dick, Auguste. Emmy Noether, 1882-1935, translated by H.I. 
Blocher, Birkhäuser, 1981.
Dictionary of Scientific Biography
Van der Waerden, B. L. "The school of Hilbert and Emmy Noether," Bull. 
London Math. Soc. 15(1)(1983), 1-7.
Weyl, H. "Emmy Noether," Scripta Mathematica, 3(1935), 201-220.
Emmy 
Noether, mathematician, Clark Kimberling's web site contains a list of 
publications about Emmy Noether.

Emmy Noether, from Wikipedia
Einstein, Albert. "The Late Emmy Noether," letter to the Editor of the New York Times, May 1, 1935.
Emmy Noether, Contributions of 20th Century Women to Physics (CWP)
MathSciNet [subscription required]
Author Profile at zbMath
Mathematics Genealogy Project

Biography at the MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive.


Photo Credit: Photograph used with the permission of Professor
Emiliana P. Noether















