



Emmy Noether: Creative Mathematical Genius






Contents | Next 
					






 
Born: Erlangen, Germany, March 23, 1882 
Died: Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, April 14, 1935 
Creative Mathematical Genius 

It might be that Emmy Noether was designed for mathematical greatness.
				Her father Max was a math professor at the University of Erlangen.
				Scholarship was in her family; two of her three brothers became
				scientists as well. Emmy would surpass them all. Ultimately Max
				would become best known as Emmy Noether's father. 
Amalie Emmy Noether spent an average childhood learning the arts
				that were expected of upper middle class girls. Girls were not
				allowed to attend the college preparatory schools. Instead, she
				went to a general "finishing school," and in 1900 was certified
				to teach English and French. But rather than teaching, she pursued
				a university education in mathematics 
She audited classes at Erlangen as one of two women among thousands
				of men, then took the entrance exam. She entered the University
				of Göttingen in 1903, again as an auditor, and transferred back
				to Erlangen in 1904 when the university finally let women enroll.
				She received her mathematics Ph.D. in 1907. 
Noether worked at the Mathematical Institute of Erlangen, without
				pay or title, from 1908 to 1915. It was during this time that
				she collaborated with the algebraist Ernst Otto Fischer and started
				work on the more general, theoretical algebra for which she would
				later be recognized. She also worked with the prominent mathematicians
				Hermann Minkowski, Felix Klein, and David Hilbert, whom she had
				met at Göttingen. In 1915 she joined the Mathematical Institute
				in Göttingen and started working with Klein and Hilbert on Einstein's
				general relativity theory. In 1918 she proved two theorems that
				were basic for both general relativity and elementary particle
				physics. One is still known as "Noether's Theorem." 
But she still could not join the faculty at Göttingen University
				because of her gender. Noether was only allowed to lecture under
				Hilbert's name, as his assistant. Hilbert and Albert Einstein
				interceded for her, and in 1919 she obtained her permission to
				lecture, although still without a salary. In 1922 she became an
				"associate professor without tenure" and began to receive a small
				salary. Her status did not change while she remained at Göttingen,
				owing not only to prejudices against women, but also because she
				was a Jew, a Social Democrat, and a pacifist.* 
During the 1920s Noether did foundational work on abstract algebra,
				working in group theory, ring theory, group representations, and
				number theory. Her mathematics would be very useful for physicists
				and crystallographers, but it was controversial then. There was
				debate whether mathematics should be conceptual and abstract (intuitionist)
				or more physically based and applied (constructionist). Noether's
				conceptual approach to algebra led to a body of principles unifying
				algebra, geometry, linear algebra, topology, and logic. 
In 1928-29 she was a visiting professor at the University of Moscow.
				In 1930, she taught at Frankfurt. The International Mathematical
				Congress in Zurich asked her to give a plenary lecture in 1932,
				and in the same year she was awarded the prestigious Ackermann-Teubner
				Memorial Prize in mathematics. 
Nevertheless, in April 1933 she was denied permission to teach
				by the Nazi government. It was too dangerous for her to stay in
				Germany, and in September she accepted a guest professorship at
				Bryn Mawr College. She also lectured at the Institute for Advanced
				Study in Princeton. The guest position was extended, but in April
				1935 she had surgery to remove a uterine tumor and died from a
				postoperative infection.


* Gottfried E. Noether, "Emmy Noether (1882-1935)," in Louise
				S. Grinstein and Paul J. Campbell: Women of Mathematics: A Bibliographic Sourcebook (New York, Greenwood Press), 1987, pp. 165-170.






					Contents | Next





