



Enrico Fermi | Biography & Inventions | Study.com













































for Teachers
for Schools
for Working Scholars®
for College Credit


























Log In


Sign Up

Menu
					










									Plans
							



									Subjects
							





Art


Business


Computer Science


Education & Teaching


English


Health & Medicine


History


Humanities


Math


Psychology


Science


Social Science







							 
						



									Art
							



									Architecture 




									Art History 




									Design 




									Performing Arts 




									Visual Arts 






							 
						



									Business
							



									Accounting 




									Business Administration 




									Business Communication 




									Business Ethics 




									Business Intelligence 




									Business Law 




									Economics 




									Finance 




									Healthcare Administration 




									Human Resources 




									Information Technology 




									International Business 




									Operations Management 




									Real Estate 




									Sales & Marketing 






							 
						



									Computer Science
							



									Computer Engineering 




									Computer Programming 




									Cybersecurity 




									Data Science 




									Software 






							 
						



									Education & Teaching
							



									Education Law & Policy 




									Pedagogy & Teaching Strategies 




									Special & Specialized Education 




									Student Support in Education 




									Teaching English Language Learners 






							 
						



									English
							



									Grammar 




									Literature 




									Public Speaking 




									Reading 




									Vocabulary 




									Writing & Composition 






							 
						



									Health & Medicine
							



									Counseling & Therapy 




									Health 




									Medicine 




									Nursing 




									Nutrition 






							 
						



									History
							



									US History 




									World History 






							 
						



									Humanities
							



									Communication 




									Ethics 




									Foreign Languages 




									Philosophy 




									Religious Studies 






							 
						



									Math
							



									Algebra 




									Basic Math 




									Calculus 




									Geometry 




									Statistics 




									Trigonometry 






							 
						



									Psychology
							



									Clinical & Abnormal Psychology 




									Cognitive Science 




									Developmental Psychology 




									Educational Psychology 




									Organizational Psychology 




									Social Psychology 






							 
						



									Science
							



									Anatomy & Physiology 




									Astronomy 




									Biology 




									Chemistry 




									Earth Science 




									Engineering 




									Environmental Science 




									Physics 






							 
						



									Social Science
							



									Anthropology 




									Criminal Justice 




									Geography 




									Law 




									Linguistics 




									Political Science 




									Sociology 







									Courses
							





By Subject


By Education Level


Adult Education


Transferable Credit







							By Subject
						



									Arts 




									Business 




									Computer Science 




									Education & Teaching 




									English (ELA) 




									Foreign Language 




									Health & Medicine 




									History 




									Humanities 




									Math 




									Psychology 




									Science 




									Social Science 






							By Education Level
						



									Elementary School 




									Middle School 




									High School 




									College 




									Graduate and Post-Grad 







									Test Prep
							





Teacher Certification Exams


Nursing Exams


Allied Health & Medicine Exams


Real Estate Exams


All Test Prep







							 
						



									Teacher Certification Exams
							



									Praxis 




									FTCE 




									TExES 




									CSET & CBEST 




									More Teacher Certification Test Prep 






							 
						



									Nursing Exams
							



									NCLEX 




									HESI 




									More Nursing Test Prep 






							 
						



									Allied Health & Medicine Exams
							



									ASCP 




									CNA 




									CNS 




									More Medical Test Prep 






							 
						



									Real Estate Exams
							



									Real Estate Sales 




									Real Estate Brokers 




									Real Estate Appraisals 







									Teach
							





Teaching Resources and Curriculum


Skills Practice


Lesson Plans


Teacher Certification


Teacher Professional Development








									Tutoring
							





Math Tutoring


Science Tutoring


Business Tutoring


Humanities Tutoring







							 
						



									Math Tutoring
							



									Algebra  Tutoring




									Calculus  Tutoring




									Geometry  Tutoring




									Pre-calculus  Tutoring




									Statistics  Tutoring




									Trigonometry  Tutoring






							 
						



									Science Tutoring
							



									Biology  Tutoring




									Chemistry  Tutoring




									Physics  Tutoring






							 
						



									Business Tutoring
							



									Accounting  Tutoring




									Economics  Tutoring




									Finance  Tutoring






							 
						



									Humanities Tutoring
							



									History  Tutoring




									Literature  Tutoring




									Writing  Tutoring






Sign Up

























Copyright










 Science Courses
			
			/
			
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	

	
	
	
		
		
		
		
		
			
Significant Physicists Study Guide
Course




		Enrico Fermi | Biography & Inventions
	






Lesson



						
							
								Additional Info
							
							
						
					




					Rochelle Enrera, Lori Jones
			


Author

Rochelle Enrera
Rochelle has a bachelor's degree in Physics for Teachers from Philippine Normal University-Manila and has completed 30+ units in MS Geology at University of the Philippines-Diliman. She is a licensed teacher and has taught Grade 10 Physics for three years. She has been a science content writer and copywriter for over three years now. 

					View bio
				


Instructor

Lori Jones
Lori has a degree from Stanford, was Principal of a K-12 private school that she started, has a Master's degree, and taught at the high school level.

					View bio
				



							Find out who Enrico Fermi was. See the biography of Enrico Fermi and understand his main contributions to particle physics. Discover the inventions of Enrico Fermi.
						
								
									Updated: 11/21/2023
								







Frequently Asked Questions



What is Enrico Fermi famous for?

Enrico Fermi was famous for his contributions to the fields of atomic and nuclear physics. He designed and operated the first controlled and self-sustaining nuclear reactor, which he named Chicago Pile-1 (CP-1). Its success led to his involvement in the Manhattan Project for the development of nuclear energy and the atomic bomb.



What was Enrico Fermi's role in the Manhattan Project?

Fermi directed experiments and solved problems related to the development of the atomic bomb. Overall, his achievements allowed the US to successfully produce an atomic bomb that helped end World  War II.



What did Enrico Fermi invent?

His inventions are mostly related to nuclear reaction and its testing. Some of these are the following: (1) self-sustaining nuclear reactor; (2) neutronic reactor shield; (3) testing material in a neutronic reactor; (4) method of testing thermal neutron fissionable material for purity; and (5) method of operating a neutronic reactor.












		Create an account
		




Table of ContentsWho was Enrico Fermi? Biography of Enrico Fermi Later Years Inventions of Enrico Fermi Contributions of Enrico Fermi Lesson SummaryShow 






Who was Enrico Fermi?



Enrico Fermi, known as the Father of the Atomic Age, was an Italian-American physicist famous for his work on the first nuclear reactor and radioactivity. He made contributions to statistical mechanics, quantum theory, nuclear physics, and particle physics. Learn more about his life and works in the succeeding sections.

Enrico Fermi was an Italian-American physicist who largely contributed to the development of the first nuclear reactor.













								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account













									Lesson
							



									Quiz
								



									Course
								



						














	
	
							6.5K
							views







Biography of Enrico Fermi



How did Enrico Fermi become a leading scientist in theoretical and experimental physics? Learn about his early years, education, and achievements below.Early YearsEnrico Fermi was born in Rome on September 29, 1901. He was the third child of Alberto Fermi, a division head in the Ministry of Railways, and Ida de Gattis, a school teacher. While attending a local grammar school, his natural ability for math and physics was evident and was even encouraged by his father's colleagues.EducationIn 1918, Fermi landed a scholarship at the Scuola Normale Superiore of Pisa, a special university college for selected gifted students. During the exam, he wrote an essay revolving around the given theme, "Specific Characteristics of Sound.". He derived the system of partial differential equations for a vibrating rod, then used Fourier analysis to solve them. The examiner was amazed at his output that he set up a meeting with him and declared that he would be a successful physicist.Enrico Fermi's education took four years. In 1922, he received the degree of Doctor of Physics from the University of Pisa based on his experimental work on X-rays. In 1923, he got a scholarship from the Italian government and spent some months with Professor Max Born in Gottingen. In 1924, he got a Rockefeller Fellowship. He then moved to Leiden, Netherlands, to work with Austrian physicist Paul Ehrenfest. He returned to Italy that same year.
He got a post as a lecturer in Mathematical Physics and Mechanics at the University of Florence from 1924 to 1926. In 1926, he discovered the statistical law now known as Fermi-Dirac statistics. He was then elected as Professor of Theoretical Physics at the University of Rome in 1927 and retained his position until 1938.Fermi's Nobel PrizeDuring his early career in Rome, he occupied himself with electrodynamic problems and theoretical observations on various spectroscopic phenomena. But a turning point in his career happened when he directed his attention toward the atomic nucleus.In 1934, he accomplished three essential things:
He developed his theory of beta radioactivity, where he combined his work with Pauli's previous radiation theory.
He demonstrated that the nuclei of each element undergo a transformation when bombarded with neutrons, following Curie and Joliot's discovery of artificial radioactivity in 1934.
He discovered nuclear reactions produced by slow neutrons, leading to the discovery of nuclear fission and the addition of elements in the periodic table.
The last two accomplishments were the reason he became the 1938 physics Nobelist.He was awarded the 1938 Nobel Prize in Physics "for his demonstrations of the existence of new radioactive elements produced by neutron irradiation, and for his related discovery of nuclear reactions brought about by slow neutrons." Enrico Fermi's Nobel Prize turned out to be an opportunity for him to emigrate to America, taking his wife, Laura, and their two children, to escape Mussolini's fascist regime. Months before he was scheduled to collect his prize at the annual ceremony in Stockholm, Sweden, he applied for teaching positions in America. He was appointed as Professor of Physics at Columbia University, New York in 1939 and remained in his post until 1942.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account















Later Years



In 1939, he confirmed the discovery of the fission process and began working hard to attain a nuclear chain reaction. He also learned that when atoms split, they release neutrons. Once the conditions are right, these neutrons can also split other atoms, producing a chain reaction.From 1942 to 1944, he worked at the Metallurgical Laboratory of the University of Chicago. He had a makeshift laboratory under Stagg Field Stadium, where he designed and built the first nuclear reactor, named Chicago Pile-1 (CP 1). He then led the experiment for a self-sustaining chain reaction that occurred on December 2, 1942.

Diagram of the Chicago Pile-1, the first controlled and self-sustaining nuclear reactor.







He was one of the leaders of the team of physicists on the Manhattan Project for the development of nuclear energy and the atomic bomb. He subsequently played an important role in solving the problems related to developing the first atomic bomb. Overall, his achievements allowed the US to successfully produce an atomic bomb that helped end World War II.In 1944, Enrico Fermi became a naturalized American citizen. From that same year until 1945, he became Associate Director of the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico. In 1946, after World War II, he became a professor at the Institute for Nuclear Studies of the University of Chicago. Today, it is known as the Enrico Fermi Institute in honor of his work. He also stayed in this position until he died in 1954.In 1950, he served as one of the first members of the General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission. In honor of his accomplishments, President Eisenhower and the Atomic Energy Commission gave Fermi a special award on November 16, 1954, for his lifetime contribution to physics, specifically in the development of atomic energy.He spent his last years investigating the origin of the cosmic rays. He developed a theory regarding the presence of a universal magnetic field, acting as a giant accelerator and accounting for the energy present in the cosmic ray particles.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Inventions of Enrico Fermi



All of Enrico Fermi's inventions are related to nuclear reaction and its testing. Some of these inventions are given below.

He invented the first self-sustaining nuclear reactor, which he called Chicago Pile-1 (CP-1). He designed and built it in the squash courts underneath the Stagg Field in Chicago.
He received a patent for testing material in a neutronic reactor and a method of testing thermal neutron fissionable material for purity.
In line with his nuclear reactor, he also received a patent for his method of operating a neutronic reactor.
He also devised a neutronic reactor shield — a radiation shield aimed to protect personnel from gamma rays and neutrons.







								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Contributions of Enrico Fermi



Enrico Fermi's contributions have been significant to atomic and nuclear physics. His most notable contributions are discussed below:Fermi StatisticsDuring his postgraduate study at the University of Gottingen, he developed a statistical model based on perfect gas behavior. He discovered how elementary particles at a given temperature and chemical potential are distributed over different states of motion. He also learned that no more than one of each particle could exist in those states. It is a fundamental characteristic of matter, and this law of distribution is significant in investigating the physics of atoms and their nuclei. The said distribution applies to a sub-atomic particle called fermions, named after Fermi.Paul Dirac independently derived the same distribution in 1926, which is why it is better known today as Fermi-Dirac statistics.Beta DecayEnrico Fermi developed a theory of beta decay involving neutrinos, which means "a neutral one". It is a subatomic particle that Fermi considered to have no mass and no electric charge, based on Wolfgang Pauli's initial hypothesis. Note that beta decay is a process undergone by an unstable atom to become more stable, such as transforming a neutron into a proton while emitting an electron in the process.Fermi used neutrinos to justify the slight loss of energy observed during the beta decay while following the principle of conservation of energy. During the beta decay of a nucleus, an electron and a neutrino are simultaneously created. This discovery laid the foundation for the inventions of the nuclear reactor and the atomic bomb.
New Radioactive ElementsDuring his experiments, he discovered that bombarding uranium with neutrons produced "new elements," which is one of the reasons why he got the Nobel Prize in Physics. Today, it is already known that the new elements characterized by Fermi were not new but are radioisotopes of known elements produced by splitting uranium (e.g., barium and strontium). However, his discovery was still used to understand further the mechanism of nuclear reaction and the atomic structure.Atomic BombFermi, along with other scientists, learned that nuclear fission is possible. He hypothesized that the high energy generated during the splitting of uranium is due to a chain reaction, where two neutrinos were produced during the splitting of the original atom. These two can collide with other uranium atoms to produce four neutrinos. This process continues until all the uranium is used up.The above hypothesis remained true only in an ideal setup. In reality, however, the reaction rates and energy produced is less due to neutrinos missing uranium atoms because of high speed and absorption. His experiments showed that for the chain reaction to be successful, he needed a suitable vessel for the chain reaction, a reliable neutron source, and a method of controlling the rate of chain reaction. He also learned that nuclear fission only occurred when it reached a critical mass, a point where a specific number of neutrinos is reached to self-sustain the reaction.As mentioned in the previous sections, the first nuclear reactor made by Enrico Fermi was the Chicago Pile-1 in his makeshift laboratory under the Stagg Football Stadium. He used a room-size pile of ultra-pure graphite seeded with lattice uranium as a vessel. He employed removable graphite rods as control rods and beryllium bombarded with highly accelerated deuterons as a source of neutrinos. CP-1 became critical last December 2, 1942, and became the first controlled self-sustaining nuclear reactor.CP-1's success led to the involvement of Enrico Fermi in atomic bomb development. He was one of the observers who witnessed the detonation of the first atomic bomb (code name "Trinity") conducted on July 16, 1945, at the Jornada del Muerto desert, New Mexico.

A few seconds after the detonation of the first nuclear weapon produced a mushroom cloud.













								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Lesson Summary



Enrico Fermi, known as the Father of the Atomic Age, was an Italian-American physicist famous for his work on the first nuclear reactor and radioactivity. He was born in Rome on September 29, 1901. In 1918, he landed a scholarship at the Scuola Normale Superiore of Pisa and received his doctoral degree based on his experimental work on X-rays in 1922. He also handled various teaching posts in Rome and the United States.
Fermi made significant contributions to the field of atomic and nuclear physics. In 1926, Enrico Fermi developed a statistical law called Fermi Statistics that applies to sub-atomic particles called fermions. He won the 1938 Nobel Prize in Physics for discovering new radioactive elements through nuclear fission and for nuclear reactions brought about by slow neutrons. He and his teams conducted the first controlled and self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction in a makeshift laboratory beneath the University of Chicago's Stagg Field Complex. Fermi named it the Chicago Pile-1 (CP-1), and it became critical on December 2, 1942. He also received several patents associated with the nuclear reactor, nuclear reaction, and various tests.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account










														
														Additional Info
													



Enrico FermiAbout 40 miles southwest of the city of Chicago, you'll find numerous places to visit. There's the charming town of Geneva, the nationally recognized city of Naperville, and a 6,800-acre particle physics laboratory, the second largest in the world, where the smallest building blocks of matter, energy, space and time are studied. This facility is called 'Fermilab', named after Enrico Fermi, a pioneer in nuclear fission and the creation of the atomic bomb. Let's learn a little more about his life and the impact he had in the field of Nuclear Physics. 


   Enrico Fermi 
 





BiographyEnrico Fermi was born in Rome in 1901, the youngest of three children. His love for physics began at age 14 when he immersed himself in the study of quantum physics, a fairly new field at the time. He continued to study physics on his own, which helped him land a scholarship in 1918 to the Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa, a university for gifted students. The school was so impressed that they soon placed him, not as a freshman, but as a doctoral student. He graduated with his doctorate in physics just four years later, in 1922. After spending four years studying and working in Germany, and then at the University of Florence, he moved back to his hometown of Rome in 1926. While there, not only did he secure a job as a physics professor at the University of Rome, he also met and married his wife Laura Capone in 1928 and had two children. One of the highlights of Fermi's life came in 1938, when he won the Nobel Prize for Physics for his discovery of new radioactive elements through nuclear fission (the splitting of the atom). This award allowed him and his family to escape the growing fascism in Italy, and immigrate to America in 1939. After arriving in the U.S., Fermi became a physics professor at Columbia University where he continued his work on nuclear fission. Fermi and his family called America home after becoming American citizens in 1944. Fermi spent the latter part of his life in the Midwest, living and working primarily in Chicago. While there, he became one of the leaders of The Manhattan Project, the project dedicated to the creation of the atomic bomb, and through his discoveries, became the most important player in the development of this weapon for the U.S.. In his final years, he continued his work as a physics professor at the University of Chicago, beginning in 1946. He kept this position until he passed away from illness in 1954. InventionsDoes your electricity come from nuclear power? If so, you have Enrico Fermi to thank for that. In 1942, he and a team of scientists constructed the first nuclear reactor, famously called the Chicago Pile-1 to produce the first self-sustaining and controlled reaction. Currently, his reactors are used in nuclear power plants around the world, providing energy to millions. 

   Artist sketch of the first nuclear reactor - the Chicago Pile-1 
 





Fermi's subsequent inventions were all changes in and improvements to reactors and how they operate. Some of these are listed below: 
The materials that make up reactors need to be tested to determine if they can withstand nuclear reaction. Fermi therefore invented a way of testing the nuclear properties of materials that are used in nuclear reactors. 
If you wanted to build a nuclear reactor, you'd probably want to know how to use it. Not to worry because in 1957, Fermi received a posthumous patent for his invention of the method of operating a reactor. 
Because of the dangers of radiation during nuclear reactors, Fermi devised a shield, called the Neutronic Reactor Shield to protect those working around reactors. 
ContributionsAs a scientist, Enrico Fermi had one of the most significant contributions in history. Not only did he have an impact on nuclear energy and physics, but his work also culminated in the creation of one of the most powerful military weapons in history, the atomic bomb. Just as Rome wasn't built in a day, the atomic bomb wasn't built in one either. In the years leading up to its creation, Fermi's continued research, discoveries and contributions paved the way for him to create the one thing that would usher the world into the nuclear age. Fermi StatisticsOne of Fermi's earliest contributions to physics came in 1926. Up until that time, the behavior of certain particles was not fully understood. But Fermi discovered the laws of behavior, called Fermi statistics, that apply to all the particles that make up matter. These particles were dubbed fermions and include electrons, protons, and neutrons. The discovery of Fermi statistics helped him gain a greater understanding of particles and led to his other contributions and discoveries. 


Beta DecayAs radioactive nuclei decay, they emit high-energy beta particles. Scientists knew that electrons, protons, and neutrons were emitted; however, they had yet to observe the emission of other particles. This all changed in 1934 when Enrico Fermi became the first to observe the emission of tiny, non-charged particles, which he called neutrinos. This emission became known as beta decay, which continues to be a foundation for the study and understanding of nuclear physics. New radioactive elementsAs Fermi continued to experiment with various particles, he decided to bombard the elements of the periodic table with neutrons. When he got to uranium, he discovered that the uranium atom split, which created new radioactive elements that were later added to the periodic table. This is the discovery that won him the Nobel Prize in 1938. 

  Enrico Fermi receiving the Nobel Prize
 





The Atomic BombThis splitting of the uranium atom laid the foundation for what would become the greatest military weapon known to mankind. In 1942, in a laboratory beneath the University of Chicago football stadium, Fermi and his team used the Chicago Pile-1 to create the first nuclear chain reaction. This eventually led to his creation and first test of the atomic bomb in New Mexico in 1945. Lesson SummaryBorn in Rome in 1901, Enrico Fermi initially began his education in physics through self-study, and was accepted as a doctoral student at a university for gifted students in Pisa. While working as a professor of physics in Rome, he began experimenting with nuclear fission, which won him the Nobel Prize in 1938. He and his family subsequently moved to the United States, where he continued his work on nuclear reactions. He created the first nuclear reactor in Chicago in 1942, and as a leader of the Manhattan Project, was instrumental in the creation of the atomic bomb in 1945. In addition to his greatest achievements, Fermi discovered new radioactive elements, discovered beta decay, and created laws governing the behavior of particles known as fermions.






			
				
				
					To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
				
			
			
			
Create your account













Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?


				I am a student
			

 I am a teacher
			



Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 30 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In

 Back
					


Resources created by teachers for teachers
Over 30,000 video lessons
		& teaching resources‐all
		in one place.
	






Video lessons





Quizzes & Worksheets





Classroom Integration





Lesson Plans



I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues. It’s like a teacher waved a magic wand and did the work for me. I feel like it’s a lifeline.



			Jennifer B.
		

				Teacher
				
				
			

































    
    
		Try it now
	




 Back
	











		Start today. Try it now
		




Table of ContentsWho was Enrico Fermi? Biography of Enrico Fermi Later Years Inventions of Enrico Fermi Contributions of Enrico Fermi Lesson SummaryShow 






Significant Physicists Study Guide


4 chapters |
				
					
					
						75 lessons
						
					
				
			






Ch 1. 
									
										Contemporary Physicists










Ch 2. 
              Early 20th Century Physicists






							Leo Szilard: Biography & the Atomic Bomb
					



							Louis de Broglie | Biography, Theories & Experiments
					



							Gustav Ludwig Hertz: Biography, Inventions & Contributions
					



							Max Delbruck: Biography & Quotes
					



							Max Delbruck: Accomplishments & Contributions to DNA
					



							Albert Abraham Michelson | Biography, Career & Contributions
					



							Arnold Sommerfeld | Biography, Career & Contributions
					



							C.V. Raman: Biography & Inventions
					

							  










5:32
						 



							Enrico Fermi | Biography & Inventions
					




Next Lesson
Erwin Schrodinger | Discover, Equation & Example




							George Gamow: Biography, Facts & Big Bang Theory
					



							Hendrik Lorentz | Nobel Prize, Books & Theory
					



							Homi Jehangir Bhabha: Biography, Inventions & Achievements
					

							  










5:21
						 



							Lise Meitner | Biography, Nuclear Fission Discovery & Legacy
					



							Marguerite Perey | Biography, Discovery & Education
					



							Max Born: Biography & Quotes
					



							Max Born & the Birth of Quantum Mechanics
					



							Max von Laue: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Max von Laue: Crystallography & X-Ray Diffraction
					



							Paul Dirac: Biography & Quotes
					



							Paul Dirac | Quantum Mechanics & Equation
					



							Richard Feynman: Biography & Quotes
					



							Richard Feynman: Books, Discoveries & Accomplishments
					



							Werner Heisenberg: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Werner Heisenberg | Experiment, Discovery & Achievements
					



							Wolfgang Ernst Pauli: Biography & Quotes
					



							Wolfgang Pauli | Biography, Contributions & Nobel Prize
					



							Maria Goeppert-Mayer: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Maria Goeppert-Mayer & the Nuclear Shell Model
					



							Maria Goeppert-Mayer: Contributions & Accomplishments
					



							Katharine Burr Blodgett: Biography, Inventions & Contributions
					







Ch 3. 
									
										Late 20th Century Physicists










Ch 4. 
									
										Pre-20th Century Physicists












Enrico Fermi | Biography & Inventions Related Study Materials




Related Topics






Browse by Courses
General Chemistry for Teachers: Professional Development
Environment & Humanity for Teachers: Professional Development
Physical Geology for Teachers: Professional Development
Principles of Health for Teachers: Professional Development
UExcel Physics: Study Guide & Test Prep
Physical Geology Textbook
Biology 101 Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
Fundamentals of Nursing Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
Middle School Earth Science Curriculum Resource & Lesson Plans
Physical Science Curriculum Resource & Lesson Plans
Earth Science: High School
Holt McDougal Physics: Online Textbook Help
Physical Science for Teachers: Professional Development
Gerontology for Teachers: Professional Development
Natural Sciences for Teachers: Professional Development






Browse by Lessons
Cesium Definition, Facts & Properties
Factors Affecting Energy Flow in Earth's Systems
Nuclear Fuels: Definition, Characteristics & Examples
Macroevolution Overview, Evidences & Examples
Recombinant DNA Definition, Applications & Examples
Alpha Carbon Overview, Acidity & Reactions
Photosynthesis Definition, Process & Equation
Sticky Ends of DNA | Definition, Concept & Examples
Phylogenetic Tree | Definition, Types & Diagram
Introns | Definition, Functions & Sequence
RNA Polymerase II | Overview, Function & Structure
What is Lichen Planus? - Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Crustacean Digestive System
Crustacean Respiratory System
Gamete Intrafallopian Transfer | Definition & Procedure














				Create an account to start this course today
			

						  
							  Used by over 30 million students worldwide
						  
						  
                


				  Create an account
		













Like this lesson



Share




Explore our library of over 88,000 lessons


Search











Browse


						Browse by subject
					


College Courses

Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses



High School Courses

AP
Common Core
GED

High School
See All High School Courses



Other Courses

College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses













Upgrade to enroll
×


Upgrade to Premium to enroll in Significant Physicists Study Guide
Enrolling in a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams.




Track course progress




Take quizzes and exams




Earn certificates of completion



			You will also be able to:
			
Create a Goal
Create custom courses
Get your questions answered




Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!

			Upgrade Now
		
Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!











Download the app




























Plans

Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars® Solutions



About Us

Blog
Careers
Teach For Us
Press Center
Ambassador
Scholarships





Support

FAQ
Site Feedback



Download the app
























Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community








©  Copyright 2024 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		





Terms of Use  
Privacy Policy  
DMCA Notice  
ADA Compliance  
Honor Code For Students


















×








