



Ernest Rutherford | Experiments, Discoveries & Awards | Study.com













































for Teachers
for Schools
for Working Scholars®
for College Credit


























Log In


Sign Up

Menu
					










									Plans
							



									Subjects
							





Art


Business


Computer Science


Education & Teaching


English


Health & Medicine


History


Humanities


Math


Psychology


Science


Social Science







							 
						



									Art
							



									Architecture 




									Art History 




									Design 




									Performing Arts 




									Visual Arts 






							 
						



									Business
							



									Accounting 




									Business Administration 




									Business Communication 




									Business Ethics 




									Business Intelligence 




									Business Law 




									Economics 




									Finance 




									Healthcare Administration 




									Human Resources 




									Information Technology 




									International Business 




									Operations Management 




									Real Estate 




									Sales & Marketing 






							 
						



									Computer Science
							



									Computer Engineering 




									Computer Programming 




									Cybersecurity 




									Data Science 




									Software 






							 
						



									Education & Teaching
							



									Education Law & Policy 




									Pedagogy & Teaching Strategies 




									Special & Specialized Education 




									Student Support in Education 




									Teaching English Language Learners 






							 
						



									English
							



									Grammar 




									Literature 




									Public Speaking 




									Reading 




									Vocabulary 




									Writing & Composition 






							 
						



									Health & Medicine
							



									Counseling & Therapy 




									Health 




									Medicine 




									Nursing 




									Nutrition 






							 
						



									History
							



									US History 




									World History 






							 
						



									Humanities
							



									Communication 




									Ethics 




									Foreign Languages 




									Philosophy 




									Religious Studies 






							 
						



									Math
							



									Algebra 




									Basic Math 




									Calculus 




									Geometry 




									Statistics 




									Trigonometry 






							 
						



									Psychology
							



									Clinical & Abnormal Psychology 




									Cognitive Science 




									Developmental Psychology 




									Educational Psychology 




									Organizational Psychology 




									Social Psychology 






							 
						



									Science
							



									Anatomy & Physiology 




									Astronomy 




									Biology 




									Chemistry 




									Earth Science 




									Engineering 




									Environmental Science 




									Physics 






							 
						



									Social Science
							



									Anthropology 




									Criminal Justice 




									Geography 




									Law 




									Linguistics 




									Political Science 




									Sociology 







									Courses
							





By Subject


By Education Level


Adult Education


Transferable Credit







							By Subject
						



									Arts 




									Business 




									Computer Science 




									Education & Teaching 




									English (ELA) 




									Foreign Language 




									Health & Medicine 




									History 




									Humanities 




									Math 




									Psychology 




									Science 




									Social Science 






							By Education Level
						



									Elementary School 




									Middle School 




									High School 




									College 




									Graduate and Post-Grad 







									Test Prep
							





Teacher Certification Exams


Nursing Exams


Allied Health & Medicine Exams


Real Estate Exams


All Test Prep







							 
						



									Teacher Certification Exams
							



									Praxis 




									FTCE 




									TExES 




									CSET & CBEST 




									More Teacher Certification Test Prep 






							 
						



									Nursing Exams
							



									NCLEX 




									HESI 




									More Nursing Test Prep 






							 
						



									Allied Health & Medicine Exams
							



									ASCP 




									CNA 




									CNS 




									More Medical Test Prep 






							 
						



									Real Estate Exams
							



									Real Estate Sales 




									Real Estate Brokers 




									Real Estate Appraisals 







									Teach
							





Teaching Resources and Curriculum


Skills Practice


Lesson Plans


Teacher Certification


Teacher Professional Development








									Tutoring
							





Math Tutoring


Science Tutoring


Business Tutoring


Humanities Tutoring







							 
						



									Math Tutoring
							



									Algebra  Tutoring




									Calculus  Tutoring




									Geometry  Tutoring




									Pre-calculus  Tutoring




									Statistics  Tutoring




									Trigonometry  Tutoring






							 
						



									Science Tutoring
							



									Biology  Tutoring




									Chemistry  Tutoring




									Physics  Tutoring






							 
						



									Business Tutoring
							



									Accounting  Tutoring




									Economics  Tutoring




									Finance  Tutoring






							 
						



									Humanities Tutoring
							



									History  Tutoring




									Literature  Tutoring




									Writing  Tutoring






Sign Up

































 Science Courses
			
			/
			
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	

	
	
	
		
		
		
		
		
			
General Science Lessons
Course




		Ernest Rutherford | Experiments, Discoveries & Awards
	





Instructor

Reed Hepler

Show bio
Reed Hepler received an M.L.I.S. from IUPUI, with emphases in Digital Curation and Archives Management. He received a Bachelor’s in History from USU, with minors in Religious Studies and Anthropology. He also earned a Certificate in Museum Studies. He has worked in museums, libraries, archives, and historical sites for the past four years.





Cite this lesson









							Learn about Ernest Rutherford. Read about Rutherford's experiments, discoveries, and awards. Explore the atomic theory, half-life, and the gold-foil experiment.
						
								
									Updated: 09/15/2022
								






		Create an account
		




Table of ContentsWho is Ernest Rutherford? Ernest Rutherford's Experiments What Did Rutherford Discover? Ernest Rutherford: Awards and Honors Lesson summaryShow 





 Who is Ernest Rutherford?



Ernest Rutherford was a scientist and physicist from New Zealand. He was born in 1871 and died in 1937 in the United Kingdom. He was one of the pioneers of physics experimentation in the age of radioactivity. His research continued to build upon the discoveries of others. He also built upon his previous research continuously. His early research discovered the phenomenon of radioactivity, and his last research projects analyzed the existence and nature of the nucleus of the atom.  


Rutherford discovered a wide range of scientific truths about the atom and its structure.






 
What is Rutherford known for? 
  
He is known for his many discoveries related to the atom and the radioactive decay of the atom. Radioactive decay occurs when atoms fall apart. Rutherford is also known for his theory regarding the state of the atom. 

What did Ernest Rutherford discover? 
  
Rutherford was the scientist who discovered the phenomenon of radioactivity and the strength of beta rays. He also discovered the existence of alpha particles in 1908. Ernest Rutherford researched the nucleus of the atom in 1911 and the existence of the proton of the atom in 1919. 








								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account











									Lesson
							



									Quiz
								



									Course
								



						














	
	
							3.2K
							views






 Ernest Rutherford's Experiments



Rutherford was inspired by the discovery of the atom in 1897. He was also encouraged by the discovery of radioactivity in 1896 and the beginnings of research on the atom. Most of the initial research of Rutherford centered on uranium. Specifically, he analyzed the radioactivity of the element. Another significant experimental focus of Ernest Rutherford was the nature of the atom. Through a series of gold foil experiments, he and some of his colleagues discovered the nucleus's existence, presence, and nature. Ernest Rutherford created various theories regarding the atom's nature and the radioactivity process. His ideas on the atom were used to form the Rutherford model. 
 Rutherford's Gold Foil ExperimentErnest Rutherford was a notable participant in the gold foil experiments. These experiments are frequently referred to as the Geiger-Marsden experiments. In these studies, alpha particles were shot at a metal foil made of gold. The researchers observed that some alpha particles would split apart when they reached the foil. From this occurrence, they deduced that each atom contained a massive object in its center that held all of its positive charges. Only this could cause the atoms to repel the alpha particles.  

The gold foil experiment was instrumental in proving the existence of the nucleus.






 While some alpha particles split apart from the alpha particles' beam, most stayed together. Rutherford and his colleagues deduced that while there was a strong positive charge in the middle of the atom, most of the atom was comprised of open and empty space. Through these discoveries, Rutherford developed his model of the structure of the atom.  Rutherford's Radioactive Decay ExperimentIn 1899, shortly after discovering radiation and radioactivity, Rutherford expanded upon existing knowledge of this phenomenon. Through a series of experiments, he showed that more than one form of radiation was present as an element decayed. Additionally, he discovered that one type of radiation was extremely forceful. Other radiation types were fragile by comparison. 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account












 What Did Rutherford Discover?



Atomic theory has been significantly impacted by the research and discoveries of Ernest Rutherford. When he initiated his research in radioactivity in the late nineteenth century, Rutherford began decades of researching the atom. His first major discovery was radioactivity. As he discovered this, he realized the nuclear reality of atoms and the massive amounts of energy they harnessed. He also discovered the existence of alpha particles, protons, the nucleus, and the difference in energy in the beta and alpha types of radioactivity emitted by decaying atoms. Another significant discovery of Ernest Rutherford was the scientific truth that different elements decay at different rates. In other words, Rutherford discovered the idea of the atomic half-life. While Ernest Rutherford did not discover the neutron, he used his knowledge of protons and electrons to theorize about the existence of the neutron. He conceived of the neutron as being a combination of protons and electrons. Today, scientists have determined that neutrons are their own unique particles. 

When did Ernest Rutherford make his discovery? 
  
He discovered radioactivity in 1899. In 1908, Rutherford discovered that alpha particles were emitted from atoms. Three years later, he used these particles to discover the nucleus of atoms. Eight years later, he released his research on the proton. It is thought, however, that Rutherford's knowledge of the proton began as far back as 1909. 

 Who Discovered the Nucleus?Rutherford was the principal researcher who discovered the presence of the nucleus of the atom in 1911. He surmised from his gold foil experiment that the atom's nucleus held all of its positive charges. He also theorized about the nature of the neutron. These discoveries and ideas of Rutherford led him to develop his own theories.  Ernest Rutherford Atomic TheoryIn 1911, Rutherford used his discoveries to generate his own theory regarding the nature and structure of the atom. Rutherford atomic theory states that the center of the atom was made up of a dense, relatively large nucleus with a positive charge. It comprised protons and proton-electron combinations that fulfilled the same function as a neutron. Negatively-charged electrons rotated around this nucleus at a great distance. 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







 Ernest Rutherford: Awards and Honors



Ernest Rutherford gained many awards for his research. For example, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for discovering that heavier elements naturally decay and form atoms with less atomic density. Part of this discovery was the discovery of protons. In addition to the Copley Medal, which Rutherford was awarded in 1922, he was awarded more than thirty other awards for his scientific research. 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







 Lesson summary



Ernest Rutherford was a scientist in New Zealand who discovered a plethora of information about atoms, radiation, radioactivity, and the nature of different elements. In 1899, Rutherford discovered the process of radiation. As part of this, he learned that radioactive decay caused more than one type of radiation. Other experiments led to the discovery of the proton and the nucleus. The proton is the positive particle in the middle of the atom. The nucleus is the center of the atom that holds all of the positive charges in the atom. 
In 1908, Rutherford discovered the existence of alpha particles. In 1911, Rutherford and colleagues reported on gold foil experiments. They shot alpha particle series at a gold foil. Most of the alpha particles remained in a straight line. However, some of the alpha particles strayed from the path. Rutherford stated that this was because of the nucleus of the atom. According to Rutherford, the nucleus was a large body of particles at the center of the atom. He theorized that the nucleus held all of the positive charges of the atom. He also surmised that most of the space in the atom was empty. Eight years later, in 1919, he officially published his research on the proton. His discoveries led to the creation of the Rutherford atomic theory. This theory states that small, light electrons rotate around a dense nucleus at a great distance.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account










Frequently Asked Questions



Why is Ernest Rutherford famous?

Rutherford is best known for discovering the existence of the atomic nucleus. He used this discovery to create a model of the atom.



When did Ernest Rutherford discover the atomic theory?

Rutherford discovered the atomic theory in 1911. He stated that small, negatively-charged neutrons revolved around a positively-charged nucleus with protons.








Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?


				I am a student
			

 I am a teacher
			



Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 30 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In

 Back
					


Resources created by teachers for teachers
Over 30,000 video lessons
		& teaching resources‐all
		in one place.
	






Video lessons





Quizzes & Worksheets





Classroom Integration





Lesson Plans



I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues. It’s like a teacher waved a magic wand and did the work for me. I feel like it’s a lifeline.



			Jennifer B.
		

				Teacher
				
				
			

































    
    
		Try it now
	




 Back
	











		Start today. Try it now
		








General Science Lessons


9 chapters |
				
					
					
						500 lessons
						
					
				
			






Ch 1. 
									
										General Sciences










Ch 2. 
									
										General Famous People in Science










Ch 3. 
									
										General Chemistry










Ch 4. 
									
										General Geography










Ch 5. 
									
										General Astronomy










Ch 6. 
									
										General Health and Medicine










Ch 7. 
              General Physics






							Goniometer Definition, Measurements & Parts
					



							Asimov's Laws of Robotics | History, Applications & Alterations
					



							Luminiferous Aether | Definition & Theory
					



							Mechanics in Physics | Definition, Types & Examples
					



							What is a Laboratory?
					



							Velocipede Definition, History & Invention
					



							Uncertainty in Physics | Formula, Calculation & Examples
					



							Ultrasonic Wave Definition, Properties & Uses
					



							Time in Physics | Importance, Features & Theories
					



							Thermodynamics Definition, Laws & Applications
					



							Tension Definition, Formula & Calculation
					



							String Theory History & Dimensions
					



							Solid State of Matter | Definition, Properties & Examples
					



							Schrödinger Wave Equation | Definition, History & Interpretation
					



							Rocket Physics Definition & Facts
					



							Physics of a Rainbow | Causes, Types & Facts
					



							Quantum Entanglement | Meaning, Applications & Examples
					



							Pulley System in Physics | Definition, Equation & Examples
					



							Pressure Definition, Formula & Units
					



							Potential & Kinetic Energy in Biology | Definition & Examples
					



							Philosophy of Physics | History, Fields & Significance
					



							Principia by Isaac Newton | Components, Summary & Impact
					



							Pascal, SI Unit for Pressure | Definition, Formula & Calculations
					



							Optics in Physics | Definition, Types & Importance
					



							Opticks by Isaac Newton | Fundamentals of Light & Significance
					



							Mu Naught Value | Definition, Units & Vacuum Permeability
					



							Modern Physics | Branches, Topics & Applications
					



							Mirage Definition, Causes & Types
					



							Microwave Radiation, Frequency & Uses in Science
					



							The Measurement Problem | Definition, Interpretations & Example
					



							Mathematical Physics Definition, Concepts & Physicists
					



							Lepton Definition, Types & Examples
					



							Lens in Physics | Definition, Anatomy & Refraction
					



							Laws of Physics | Meaning & List
					



							Laws of Gases in Chemistry | Definitions & Formulas
					



							Katherine Johnson | Biography, Facts & Accomplishments
					



							History of Physics | Origin, Discovery & Timeline
					



							History of Engineering | Invention & Timeline
					



							Hazard Ratio Overview & Interpretation | What are Hazard Ratios?
					



							Gyroscope Definition, Uses & Effect
					



							Gas Definition, Types & Examples
					



							Forensic Engineering Definition, Types & Examples
					



							Fields in Physics | Definition, Types & Examples
					



							Fermilab History, Particle Accelerator & Experiments
					



							Fata Morgana History, Causes & Examples
					



							Famous Physicists | List & Contributions
					



							Ernest Rutherford | Experiments, Discoveries & Awards
					




Next Lesson
Equilibrium in Physics | Definition, Types & Examples




							Engineering Disciplines | Definition & Examples
					



							Electroplating | Definition, Process & Uses
					



							Electrical Engineering Definition, History & Examples
					



							Dynamics in Physics | Definition, Mechanics & Examples
					



							Drag in Physics | Coefficient, Equation & Examples
					



							Density of Air | Definition, Equation & Calculation
					



							Color | Definition, Types & Theory
					



							Atomic Bomb Definition, Creation & Legacy
					



							Antimatter Definition, Properties & Uses
					



							Alkaline Battery | Components, Chemicals & Sizes
					



							Thermodynamic System | Definition, Types & Examples
					



							Electromagnetism | Definition, History & Examples
					



							Motion Graphs & Derivatives | Overview & Types
					



							Acoustics | Definition, Types & Importance
					



							Dielectrics Definition, Types & Examples
					



							Solid Mechanics Overview, Principles & Formulas
					



							Thermodynamic Properties | Overview, Types & Examples
					



							Multiverse Overview, Types & Theories | What is the Multiverse?
					



							Low Frequency Oscillator Process & Uses | What is an LFO?
					



							Waveform Meaning, Parts & Diagram
					







Ch 8. 
									
										General Earth Science










Ch 9. 
									
										General Pre-Historic












Ernest Rutherford | Experiments, Discoveries & Awards Related Study Materials




Related Topics






Browse by Courses
AP Chemistry: Help and Review
AP Chemistry: Tutoring Solution
Anatomy and Physiology: Certificate Program
College Biology: Help and Review
Introduction to Biology: Certificate Program
High School Chemistry: Tutoring Solution
College Chemistry: Help and Review
Biology 106: Pathophysiology
CSET Foundational-Level General Science (215) Prep
FTCE Middle Grades General Science 5-9 (004) Prep
ILTS Science - Physics (243) Prep
Weather and Climate
Supplemental Science: Study Aid
CLEP Biology: Study Guide & Test Prep Course
UExcel Anatomy & Physiology: Study Guide & Test Prep






Browse by Lessons
Ernest Rutherford's Gold Foil Experiment | Overview & Discovery
Ernest Rutherford Lesson for Kids: Facts & Atomic Theory
How a System Approaches Thermal Equilibrium
Change in Kinetic & Potential Energy | Formula & Examples
Plotting Pressure vs. Volume for a Thermodynamic Process
Spectra Associated With Electronic or Nuclear Transitions
Developing & Analyzing Experiments Using Kirchhoff's Loop Rule
Current, Power & Potential Difference Through a Resistor
Constructing Equations for Wave Parameters From Field Values
Predicting Dependence of Major Features of a Diffraction Pattern
Equilibrium Constant & Cell Potential
Solving Mathematical Representations of Free-Body Diagrams
Internal Energy of a System: Qualitative & Quantitative Calculations














				Create an account to start this course today
			

						  
							  Used by over 30 million students worldwide
						  
						  
                


				  Create an account
		













Like this lesson



Share




Explore our library of over 88,000 lessons


Search











Browse


						Browse by subject
					


College Courses

Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses



High School Courses

AP
Common Core
GED

High School
See All High School Courses



Other Courses

College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses













Upgrade to enroll
×


Upgrade to Premium to enroll in General Science Lessons
Enrolling in a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams.




Track course progress




Take quizzes and exams




Earn certificates of completion



			You will also be able to:
			
Create a Goal
Create custom courses
Get your questions answered




Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!

			Upgrade Now
		
Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!











Download the app




























Plans

Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars® Solutions



About Us

Blog
Careers
Teach For Us
Press Center
Ambassador
Scholarships





Support

FAQ
Site Feedback



Download the app
























Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community








©  Copyright 2024 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		





Terms of Use  
Privacy Policy  
DMCA Notice  
ADA Compliance  
Honor Code For Students


















×








