











































Exploring Linear Algebra: Labs and Projects with MATLAB® - 1st Editio




















































Skip to main content

 Free standard shipping on all orders















Search






To hear autocomplete suggestions tab past the search button after typing keywords.

















 Shop By Subject 










 New & Bestselling 




 Instructors & Students 




 Professional Practice 


 Publish With Us 




 Sale & Offers 




















































 Preview Book





Preview Book


 





 Table of Contents
 Book Description
 Instructor Resources


1st Edition
Exploring Linear Algebra
Labs and Projects with MATLAB®


By Crista Arangala
Copyright 2019
























156 Pages
40 B/W Illustrations



by
Chapman & Hall








































156 Pages
40 B/W Illustrations



by
Chapman & Hall








































156 Pages
40 B/W Illustrations



by
Chapman & Hall






Learn about VitalSource eBooks Opens popup


Also available as eBook on:



 Taylor & Francis eBooks 
(Institutional Purchase)Opens in new tab or window







































Description




Exploring Linear Algebra: Labs and Projects with MATLAB® is a hands-on lab manual that can be used by students and instructors in classrooms every day to guide the exploration of the theory and applications of linear algebra. For the most part, labs discussed in the book can be used individually or in a sequence. Each lab consists of an explanation of material with integrated exercises. Some labs are split into multiple subsections and thus exercises are separated by those subsections.
The exercise sections integrate problems using Mathematica demonstrations (an online tool that can be used with a browser with Java capabilities) and MATLAB® coding. This allows students to discover the theory and applications of linear algebra in a meaningful and memorable way. 

Features:


The book’s inquiry-based approach promotes student interaction 


Each chapter contains a project set which consists of application-driven projects emphasizing the chapter’s materials


Adds a project component to any Linear Algebra course


Explores many applications to a variety of fields that can promote research projects


Employs MATLAB® to calculate and explore concepts and theories of linear algebra








Table of Contents



Preface ix; 1 Limits and Continuity 1; 2 Derivatives and Their Applications;3 Areas, Integrals, and Accumulation; 4 Applications of AntiderivativesMathematica Demonstrations and References; Index 





Author(s)



Biography

Dr. Crista Arangala holds a PhD in mathematics from the University of Cincinnati. She is now at Elon University in North Carolina teaching and researching in a variety of fields including mathematical modeling and service learning education. She was chosen to be a Fulbright Scholar in 2014. She runs a traveling science museum with her Elon University students in Kerala, India. She is also the author of Exploring Calculus: Labs and Projects with Mathematica published by CRC Press. 









 Add to Cart









About VitalSource eBooks



VitalSource is a leading provider of eBooks.

 Access your materials anywhere, at anytime.
 Customer preferences like text size, font type, page color and more.
 Take annotations in line as you read.



View VitalSource eBook FAQs »










Multiple eBook Copies



This eBook is already in your shopping cart. If you would like to replace it with a different purchasing option please remove the current eBook option from your cart.





View Cart














Book Series

This book is included in the following book series:

 Textbooks in Mathematics





Related Subjects


Mathematics & Statistics for Engineers


Algebra


Linear & Multilinear Algebra


Engineering & Technology


Advanced Mathematics


Mathematics & Statistics


Algebra


Mathematics for Engineering




Frequently Bought Together

















Book Preview

































Back To Top 












©  Informa UK Limited, an Informa Plc company




Contact Us


Customer Service


Editorial Contacts


Sales Contacts


Rights and Permissions


Become an Affiliate Partner Opens in new tab or window


FAQs
Partners


Customer Resources


Authors


Booksellers


Instructors


Request An Inspection Copy


Librarians


Press and Media


Professionals


Societies and Associations


Students




Our Products


eBooks


eBook+


Book Series


Online Platforms


Open Access Books


Focus Shortform Books 




About Us


About Routledge


About Taylor & Francis Opens in new tab or window


Taylor & Francis Journals Opens in new tab or window


Careers Opens in new tab or window


Blog
Topics


Policies


Shipping Information


Returns and Cancellations


Terms and Conditions


Inspection Copies


Sustainability


Accessibility


Privacy Policy Opens in new tab or window



SOCIAL  NETWORKS 
Facebook - Opens in new tab or window       LinkedIn - Opens in new tab or window      Twitter - Opens in new tab or window       YouTube - Opens in new tab or window   













The country you have selected will result in the following:



Product pricing will be adjusted to match the corresponding currency.
The title Perception will be removed from your cart because it is not available in this region.




Continue
Cancel
















