











































Exploring Linear Algebra: Labs and Projects with Mathematica ® - 1st 




















































Skip to main content

 Free standard shipping on all orders















Search






To hear autocomplete suggestions tab past the search button after typing keywords.

















 Shop By Subject 










 New & Bestselling 




 Instructors & Students 




 Professional Practice 


 Publish With Us 




 Sale & Offers 











































 Preview Book





Preview Book


 





 Table of Contents
 Book Description
Critics' Reviews
 Instructor Resources


1st Edition
Exploring Linear Algebra
Labs and Projects with Mathematica ®


By Crista Arangala
Copyright 2015





















152 Pages
38 B/W Illustrations



by
Chapman & Hall








































151 Pages



by
Chapman & Hall






Learn about VitalSource eBooks Opens popup


Also available as eBook on:



 Taylor & Francis eBooks 
(Institutional Purchase)Opens in new tab or window







































Description




Exploring Linear Algebra: Labs and Projects with Mathematica® is a hands-on lab manual for daily use in the classroom. Each lab includes exercises, theorems, and problems that guide your students on an exploration of linear algebra. 

The exercises section integrates problems, technology, Mathematica® visualization, and Mathematica CDFs, enabling students to discover the theory and applications of linear algebra in a meaningful way. The theorems and problems section presents the theoretical aspects of linear algebra. Students are encouraged to discover the truth of each theorem and problem, to move toward proving (or disproving) each statement, and to present their results to their peers. 

Each chapter also contains a project set consisting of application-driven projects that emphasize the material in the chapter. Students can use these projects as the basis for further undergraduate research.






Table of Contents



Matrix Operations Lab 0: An Introduction to Mathematica Lab 1: Matrix Basics and Operations Lab 2: A Matrix Representation of Linear Systems Lab 3: Powers, Inverses, and Special Matrices Lab 4: Graph Theory and Adjacency Matrices Lab 5: Permutations and Determinants Lab 6: 4 x 4 Determinants and Beyond Project Set 1 

Invertibility Lab 7: Singular or Nonsingular? Why Singularity Matters Lab 8: Mod It Out, Matrices with Entries in ZpLab 9: It’s a Complex World Lab 10: Declaring Independence: Is It Linear? Project Set 2 

Vector Spaces Lab 11: Vector Spaces and SubspacesLab 12: Basing It All on Just a Few Vectors Lab 13: Linear Transformations Lab 14: Eigenvalues and Eigenspaces Lab 15: Markov Chains, An Application of Eigenvalues Project Set 3 

Orthogonality Lab 16: Inner Product Spaces Lab 17: The Geometry of Vector and Inner Product SpacesLab 18: Orthogonal Matrices, QR Decomposition, and Least Squares Regression Lab 19: Symmetric Matrices and Quadratic Forms Project Set 4 

Matrix Decomposition with Applications Lab 20: Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) Lab 21: Cholesky Decomposition and Its Application to Statistics Lab 22: Jordan Canonical Form Project Set 5 

Applications to Differential Equations Lab 23: Linear Differential Equations Lab 24: Higher-Order Linear Differential Equations Lab 25: Phase Portraits, Using the Jacobian Matrix to Look Closer at Equilibria Project Set 6 

Mathematica Demonstrations and References 
Index





Author(s)



Biography

Crista Arangala







Critics' Reviews




"The presented book provides readers with a set of interesting exercises and problems regarding linear algebra. The book covers the scope of an undergraduate course … excellent supplementary material for a linear algebra course …"—Zentralblatt MATH 1320








 Add to Cart









About VitalSource eBooks



VitalSource is a leading provider of eBooks.

 Access your materials anywhere, at anytime.
 Customer preferences like text size, font type, page color and more.
 Take annotations in line as you read.



View VitalSource eBook FAQs »










Multiple eBook Copies



This eBook is already in your shopping cart. If you would like to replace it with a different purchasing option please remove the current eBook option from your cart.





View Cart














Book Series

This book is included in the following book series:

 Textbooks in Mathematics





Related Subjects


Mathematics & Statistics for Engineers


Algebra


Engineering & Technology


Advanced Mathematics


Mathematics & Statistics


Algebra


Mathematics for Engineering




Frequently Bought Together

















Book Preview

































Back To Top 












©  Informa UK Limited, an Informa Plc company




Contact Us


Customer Service


Editorial Contacts


Sales Contacts


Rights and Permissions


Become an Affiliate Partner Opens in new tab or window


FAQs
Partners


Customer Resources


Authors


Booksellers


Instructors


Request An Inspection Copy


Librarians


Press and Media


Professionals


Societies and Associations


Students




Our Products


eBooks


eBook+


Book Series


Online Platforms


Open Access Books


Focus Shortform Books 




About Us


About Routledge


About Taylor & Francis Opens in new tab or window


Taylor & Francis Journals Opens in new tab or window


Careers Opens in new tab or window


Blog
Topics


Policies


Shipping Information


Returns and Cancellations


Terms and Conditions


Inspection Copies


Sustainability


Accessibility


Privacy Policy Opens in new tab or window



SOCIAL  NETWORKS 
Facebook - Opens in new tab or window       LinkedIn - Opens in new tab or window      Twitter - Opens in new tab or window       YouTube - Opens in new tab or window   













The country you have selected will result in the following:



Product pricing will be adjusted to match the corresponding currency.
The title Perception will be removed from your cart because it is not available in this region.




Continue
Cancel
















