










FERMI The Life of Enrico Fermi | U.S. DOE Office of Science (SC)




























































Javascript is currently disabled in your browser. Please enable Javascript, or use an alternative browser.




Skip to content





U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science

























Main Navigation




Home


About


Organization


Budget


STI


Field Operations


Federal Advisory Committees


President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST)


Diversity, Equity & Inclusion


History


Honors & Awards


Jobs


Brochures, Logos, & Information Resources


Contact




Laboratories


Ames National Laboratory


Argonne National Laboratory


Brookhaven National Laboratory


Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory


Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory


Oak Ridge National Laboratory


Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory


SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory


Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility


Safety and Security Policy


Laboratory Policy


Operations Program Management


Acquisition Management




Science Features


Science Highlights


News Archive




Universities


Interactive Grants Map


SC In Your State




User Facilities


User Facilities at a Glance


User Resources


User Statistics


Policies and Processes


Frequently Asked Questions




Funding


Office of Sponsored Activities


Topical Funding Opportunity Awards


Award Search / Public Abstracts


Find Funding


Early Career Research Program


Promoting Inclusive and Equitable Research (PIER) Plans


Statement on Digital Data Management


Acknowledgements of Federal Support




Initiatives


Artificial Intelligence for Science


Biopreparedness Research Virtual Environment (BRaVE)


Data Resources (PuRe Data)


Funding for Accelerated, Inclusive Research (FAIR)


Microelectronics


National Virtual Biotechnology Laboratory (NVBL)


Quantum Information Science (QIS)


Reaching a New Energy Sciences Workforce (RENEW)


SC Energy Earthshots




Programs


Advanced Scientific Computing Research


Basic Energy Sciences


Biological and Environmental Research


Fusion Energy Sciences


High Energy Physics


Nuclear Physics


Project Assessment


Workforce Development for Teachers and Scientists


Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business Technology Transfer


Accelerator R&D and Production (ARDAP)


Isotope R&D and Production (IP)










Utility Navigation


SC Home


Organization


Contact


Stay Connected




DOE Home













Breadcrumb Navigation


Home


About Us


Honors & Awards


The Enrico Fermi Award


The Life of Enrico Fermi













The Life of Enrico Fermi


Click for a story about the photograph
On December 2, 1942, Enrico Fermi and his team of scientists harnessed the atom and opened the door to new scientific and technological realms. His achievement allowed the U.S. to produce the atomic bomb that helped end World War II. Now, more than fifty years later, nuclear energy provides a significant part of the world's electrical power, and radioactive materials are used for hundreds of industrial, agricultural, and medical applications-from food preservation to cancer therapy, checking the integrity of welds in pipelines and bridge supports, and gauges that measure the thickness of coatings applied to paper.
Fermi was born in Rome in 1901 and received his doctorate from the University of Pisa in 1922. During 1923 to 1924, he studied in Göttingen, Germany, with Max Born, and in Leiden, The Netherlands, with Paul Ehrenfest. From 1924 to 1926, Fermi lectured in mathematical physics and mechanics at the University of Florence. He became the first professor of theoretical physics at the University of Rome, where he taught for 12 years.
In 1938, Fermi traveled to Stockholm to receive the Nobel Prize "for his identification of new radioactive elements produced by neutron bombardment and his discovery, made in connection with this work, of nuclear reactions effected by slow neutrons." Fermi's wife Laura, in her book Atoms in the Family*, wrote, "Four years of patient researches; the broken and the unbroken tubes full of beryllium powder and radon; the strenuous races along the hall of the physics building to rush element after element to the Geiger counters; the efforts to understand nuclear processes, and the many tests to prove the theories ... these had won the Nobel Prize for Enrico."*
By 1938, Fascist Italy had become intolerable to Fermi. He used his trip to Stockholm as an opportunity to flee. He and his family sailed directly to the United States, where he had visited many times before. In the months before his Stockholm trip, he had sought teaching positions in America and had received offers from five universities. He chose a professorship in Physics at Columbia University. There, in 1939, he confirmed the discovery of the fission process and began striving to attain a nuclear chain reaction.
From 1942 to 1944, Fermi worked at the Metallurgical Laboratory of the University of Chicago. In a makeshift laboratory under Stagg Field Stadium, he designed and built the first nuclear reactor and led the epochal experiment that demonstrated the first self-sustained chain reaction. More than any individual, he was responsible for developing a means for the controlled release of nuclear energy.
Fermi became a U.S. citizen in 1944. From 1944 to 1945, he became Associate Director of the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico. In 1946, he returned to the University of Chicago as a professor at the Institute of Nuclear Studies, which now bears his name--Fermi Institute. He resumed his fundamental research interests in nuclear and elementary particle physics and also, beginning in 1950, served as one of the first members of the General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission.
On November 16, 1954, President Eisenhower and the Atomic Energy Commission gave Fermi a special award for his lifetime of accomplishments in physics and, in particular, for the development of atomic energy. Fermi's other research resulted in the Fermi-Dirac particle statistics, the theory of beta-decay, the Thomas-Fermi model of the atom, and a theory of the origin of cosmic rays.
Fermi died on November 28, 1954, and the Enrico Fermi Award was established in 1956 to perpetuate the memory of his brilliance as a scientist and to recognize others of his kind-inspiring others by his example.

*Laura Fermi, Atoms in the Family, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1954, pg. 123.








The Enrico Fermi Award Navigation


Nomination & Selection Guidelines


Award Laureates


Ceremony


The Life of Enrico Fermi






Contact The Enrico Fermi Award


Address

                                U.S. Department of Energy  SC-3/Germantown Building  1000 Independence Ave., SW
                                Washington, DC 20585
                            


Email
Send us a message
SCFermi.Award@science.doe.gov











Top











Footer Main Navigation
SC Home
Contact
FOIA Requests
Web Policies
Site Map













Contact Information



Footer Secondary Navigation

About 
                    Energy.gov
Web 
                    Policies

                    Privacy
No Fear 
                    Act
Whistleblower 
                    Protection
Vulnerability Disclosure 
                    Program
Information 
                    Quality
Open 
                    Gov

                    Accessibility
Stay 
                    Connected


Energy 
                    Department
Careers & 
                    Internships
Budget & 
                    Performance
Directives, Delegations & 
                    Requirements

                    FOIA
Inspector 
                    General
Privacy 
                    Program
Small 
                    Business
SBIR/STTR 
                    Programs


Federal 
                    Government
The White 
                    House

                    USA.gov













                Leaving Office of Science
            
The link you have requested will take you to a website outside the Office of Science.

Please click the following link to continue:




Thank you for visiting our site. We hope your visit was informative and enjoyable.


























sub nav





background



Layer 1




















