




 



Field Theory - What is it? Definition, Examples and More
































    
















What is it?
Tour
Techniques
 The top 50 of hundreds of business management techniques, concepts and ideas in KnowledgeBrief.

AIDA
Balance Sheet
Balanced Scorecard
Benchmarking
Budgeting Processes
Business Ethics
Business Intelligence (BI)
Change Management
Competitive Advantage
Contract Management
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
Customer Satisfaction
Digital Marketing
Direct Marketing
Discounted Cash Flow (DCF)
Due Diligence
e-Commerce


Economies of Scale and Scope
Emotional Intelligence
Employee Engagement
Entrepreneurship
Human Capital
Information Management (IM)
Just-In-Time (JIT)
Kaizen
Knowledge Management (KM)
Leadership
Lean Manufacturing / Production
Market Segmentation
Marketing Management
Marketing Mix
Mentoring
Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A)
Performance Appraisal


PESTEL Analysis
Portfolio Management
Product Life Cycle (PLC)
Public Relations
Quality Management
Sensitivity Analysis
Six Sigma
Sourcing
Strategic Planning
Supply Chain Finance (SCF)
Supply Chain Management (SCM)
SWOT Analysis
Total Quality Management (TQM)
Value Chain Management (VCM)
Venture Capital
Warehouse Management Systems (WMS)


Finance Techniques
Human Resources Techniques
Operations Techniques
Procurement Techniques
Sales & Marketing Techniques
Strategy & Planning Techniques
Technology Techniques
View All »




Qualifications
 








 










Field Theory

"Lewin (1947) believed that in order to make sense of the world, we should see our present situation – the status quo – as being maintained by certain conditions or forces."


Field theory is an important idea in individual and organisational change management. Its relevance as a theory of leadership and change is highlighted, numerous strengths and weaknesses are described, and it is shown how it can be used to address problems faced by organisations today.



Technique Overview


Field Theory Definition
"An approach to understanding group behaviour by trying to map out the totality and complexity of the field in which the behaviour takes place. It is one of the four elements of Lewin's Planned approach to change" (Burnes, 2009).
Field Theory Description *
* The full technique overview will be available soon. Contact us to register your interest in our business management platform, and learn all about Field Theory. 
Learn about KnowledgBrief Techniques

Business Evidence

Strengths, weaknesses and examples of Field Theory *
* The business evidence section is for premium members only. Please contact us about accessing the Business Evidence. 

Business Application

Implementation, success factors and measures of Field Theory *
* The business application section is for premium members only. Please contact us about accessing the Business application. 

Professional Tools

Field Theory videos and downloads *
* The professional tools section is for premium members only. Please contact us about accessing the professional tools. 

Further Reading

Field Theory web and print resources *
Field Theory references (4 of up to 20) *

Bamforth, K. & Trist, E. (1951). Some Social and Psychological Consequences of the Longwall Method of Coal Getting. Human Relations, Vol. 4, pp.3-38.
Barton, D., Newell, R., & Wilson, G. (2002). Preparing for a financial crisis. The McKinsey Quarterly, pp. 79 – 87.
Burnes, B. (2009) Managing Change, Pearson, Essex, UK.
Cartwright, N. (1987) “Philosophical Problems of Quantum Theory: The Response of American Physicists.” Pp. 417-435 in The Probabilistic Revolution, Volume II: Ideas in the Sciences, edited by Lorenz Krüger, Gerd Gigerenzer, and Mary S. Morgan. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

* The further reading section is for premium members only. Please contact us about accessing the further reading. 



 

Learn more about KnowledgeBrief Manage and how you can equip yourself with the knowledge to succeed on Field Theory and hundreds of other essential business management techniques






Access to this Technique coming soon
Would you like instant online access to Field Theory and hundreds of other essential business management techniques completely free?
Full access to this and 500+ other business techniques coming soon.


Further Reading
 


Field theory by Kurt Lewin.. Recommended book on Field Theory by our researchers
  

"Need information on Field Theory you can trust? All content in KnowledgeBrief is written by experts in the field, and all further resources for detailed information has been been approved by KnowledgeBrief."




Other members were also interested in... 
Related Concept: Safeguarding
 This technique offers a review of the essential concept of safeguarding, exploring the legal requirements, explanations and application. It presents a number of case studies and success factors showing you how to create a safe and secure working environment for your staff, clients and customers.









KnowledgeBrief
KnowledgeBrief helps companies and individuals to get ahead and stay ahead in business. Advance your business, Advance your career.
KnowledgeBrief management courses


Management Apprenticeships
CMI Qualifications
CMI Level 3 
CMI Level 5 
CMI Level 7 




Team Leader Apprenticeship
Department Leader Apprenticeship
Project Manager Apprenticeship
Coaching Professional Apprenticeship
Senior Leader Apprenticeship






Hot Topics

Threats and Opportunities of Risk Management
Issue Management
Risks vs Issues
Requirements Gathering (MOSCOW and T-shirts)

Blogs

What does successful mentoring look like?
KnowledgeBrief Well-being Day: Supporting Young Lives Vs Cancer
KnowledgeBrief Excels in Ofsted Inspection: A Trio of Strengths Delivering Exceptional Benefits
KnowledgeBrief’s charity partner: Young Lives vs Cancer


















Terms and conditions | Privacy Policy |   Cookie Settings 

© Copyright KnowledgeBrief 2009 - 2024





