












































Five Famous Mathematicians And Their Contributions - Smore Science Magazine























































 
























		Skip to content









Search for:

  


































Your cart is currently empty!







  
















Main Menu
 


HomeSmore MagazineMenu Toggle

Issues 2023Menu Toggle

Spring Issue, 2023 Summer Issue, 2023 
 Issues 2022Menu Toggle

Spring Issue 2022 Summer Issue 2022 Fall Issue 2022 Winter Issue 2022 
 Issues 2021Menu Toggle

Spring Issue 2021 Summer Issue 2021 Fall Issue 2021 Winter Issue 2021 

ResourcesMenu Toggle

Science Like A Girl Live Animal Cameras Live Space Cameras Science Videos For Kids Science Questions For Kids Science News For Students
ProductsMenu Toggle

Single Issues Science Kits Activities & Printables Science Tees & Gifts Posters
Subscribe 










SUBSCRIBE 


 Close



















Sign up today!  Get 30% off
Use Coupon STEM30 at checkout
**Limited time discount offer
Subscribe Now





 
 

 
 








Five Famous Mathematicians And Their Contributions




By 
Anubhav Ghosh / April 09, 2024






 


Share

 


Twitter

 


Pinterest

 






We have turned a set of symbols and signs into a language to help us explain nature. Just look at the golden ratio of 1.618304, maintained to make aesthetically pleasing structures. We have learned to create complex shapes with a ruler and compass in geometry. We can portion the big into small parts and join the small into a big portion using calculus. We have answered problems in science and commerce with math. But how did we get here, and who took us to this place? Let’s inspire ourselves with the works of five famous mathematicians who designed the language of mathematics. 











Euclid (325BC-265BC) 
















Euclid Statue. Credits: Wikimedia/Mark A. Wilson





Euclid was one of the greatest mathematicians of his era, if not the best. Euclidean geometry was the gold standard in mathematics until the 19th century. His works, primarily found in The Elements, are listed below:Axiomatic system of proofEuclid discovered the importance of statements that are assumed to be true, called axioms. For example, every event has a cause is an axiom. You cannot simply have a way to prove this fundamental fact apart from just seeing it happen in this manner. Similarly, Euclid laid down ten axioms that are assumed to be true. It is on these axioms that we base a lot of arguments on mathematical and geometric proofs. An example of his axiom is: A line can be drawn between any two points.Contribution to number theory and geometryEuclid defined terms like point, unity, prime, line, etc. These definitions gave a clear picture of what the person was working on and the features of the shape or structure.The definitions also helped prove theories like there are an infinite number of primes. He also developed the concept of geometric progression. (e.g.: 2(21),4(22),8(23),16(24),…).Euclid also worked on 3-dimensional figures, in Greek,The Golden SectionEuclid found out that if a line segment is divided into a short portion S and an extended portion L, then if;L/S = (L+S)/L, the structure will be aesthetically pleasing. Later on, the golden section became the golden ratio of 1.618304. 











Aryabhata (476CE-550CE) 




















 Aryabhata. Credits: Wikimedia/1940368 Hemateja





Aryabhata is one of the first mathematicians to use math in astronomy. His contribution is so outstanding that the first satellite India launched was named after Aryabhata. His contributions to the field of math are:Discovery of zeroThe value of nothing is far more critical than was realized. Aryabhata developed the decimal and place value systems, both of which recognized the importance of zero. And with the discovery of zero, we actually invented the wheel of mathematics, the number that kept math moving on the right track.Calculation of pi“Add four to 100, multiply by eight, and then add 62,000. By this rule, the circumference of a circle with a diameter of 20,000 can be approached.”These were the exact words in Aryabhata’s Ganita or mathematical statement. The approximate value came up to 3.1416, close to the current value of 3.14159. Pi was rediscovered in the 1700s, but without Aryabhata’s work, we would have been dealing with problems in making wheels, mills, and all sorts of circular stuff.Contribution to algebraAryabhata is known as the “Father of Algebra” due to his genius use of algebra in planetary systems. He was the first to explore the integer solutions to the equation forms by =ax+c and by =ax-c. 











Sir Isaac Newton (1643-1727) 




















 Sir Isaac Newton (1643-1727). Credits: Wikimedia/Godfrey Kneller





It wasn’t just the apple that boggled Sir Isaac Newton’s amazing mind. Besides the laws of gravity and motion, Newton played a major role in further pushing math’s boundaries. His best contributions are:The invention of calculusNewton invented calculus, a very cool branch of mathematics. Suppose you were to fill a pool with sand. The challenge begins immediately: You need to calculate the pool’s volume by adding the volumes of individual grains of sand. Not that easy, right? Well, Newton has a solution for you. Calculus can help add extremely tiny portions (the volume of a sand grain) into a big portion (the volume of a pool) in a few steps only. Bonus: You can do just the opposite and divide the volume of the pool into that of a grain of sand.The invention of the binomial theorem(a+b)2 = a2 + b2+ 2ab(a+b)3 = a3+ b3 + 3ab2 + 3a2b(a+b)12 … Yeah, this is where it goes crazy. Newton solved this problem by introducing the binomial theorem. The formula is:(a+b)n= ∑nr=0nCr an-rbrnCr  is the binomial coefficient. And how do you solve for nCr? Here’s a cool triangle to help you out: 




















 Credits: Mathigon













Note the pattern here. Let’s see again: 



















 











You can work your way up this triangle, called the Pascal triangle, up to 12 and fill in the values of x.For example, 34 can be written as (1+2)4(1+2)4, here a = 1, b = 2Therefore, 4C0.14-0. 20+ 4C1.14-1.21 + 4C2.14-2.22 + 4C3. 14-3.23 + 4C4.14-4.24 = 1 + 8 + 24 + 32 + 16 = 81Imagine this formula on larger numbers. You are getting a head start, all thanks to Sir Isaac Newton. 











Pierre de Fermat (1601-1665) 




















 Pierre de Fermat. Credits: Wikimedia





Pierre de Fermat is referred to as the father of modern number theory, and rightly so. He has touched on geometry and calculus and worked on theories of probability. His works are:Discovery of analytical geometryThe study of geometry drawn on a graph is known as analytical geometry. An arc or line drawn on a graph can be used in analytical geometry, and a square or circle drawn on a graph can also be a part of it. The trajectory of a rocket, which is an arc, has analytical geometry, too—all thanks to Pierre de Fermat.Discovery of differential calculusPierre de Fermat developed the math of rate of change. Differential calculus compares the rate of change of one quantity to another. Newton used this field of math to prove his concepts on the laws of motion. 











Georg Cantor (1845-1918) 




















 Georg Cantor. Credits: Wikimedia/Sreyansu tm





Georg Cantor had the most audacious proof for the world. We still struggle to define infinity, yet Cantor found a way to give some perspective to how we see it. His works include:Invented the set theoryAll cats are animals, but some animals are cats.Explore this statement carefully. All cats (house cats, lions, tigers) form a set of cats and are also mammals. However, not all mammals are cats; some might be different types of dogs, fish, and birds. Thus, all cats form a set of cats, but it falls under the set of animals, which has multiple sets of animals like fish and dogs. This might not seem like much, but grouping numbers is a major data-maintaining tool in mathematics, and Georg Cantor made it happen.Concept of countable and uncountable infinitiesInfinity cannot be counted, or so the thought went. Naturally, when Cantor proved otherwise, he met with much resistance. However, a quick proof called Cantor’s diagonal argument did the trick. According to the argument, more real numbers (basically decimal numbers in this case) are between 0 and 1 than integers. Thus, even if extended infinitely, the number of real numbers will at least always be one more than the number of integers, making it uncountable. Integers form countable infinity because their number can always be assigned as one less than the total number of real numbers between 0 and 1. 











Here’s a link to the explanation of Georg Cantor’s argument: 












 























Copyright @smorescience. All rights reserved. Do not copy, cite, publish, or distribute this content without permission. 






 












Join 20,000+ parents and educators 
						To get the FREE science newsletter in your inbox!
					 
















SUBSCRIBE TO OUR NEWSLETTER
..........      ..........
Subscribe to our mailing list to get updates to your email inbox.
Monthly Newsletter








*Invalid email address.


 
Yes! Sign Me Up Please

























Check our past science newsletters














 















 










  Related Posts   




15 Science Gifts for Dad That Are Actually…Cool? See For Yourself!

Blog / By  

				Sarita Menon, Ph.D.			



		 /  June 10, 2024  








  


Jun 10 2024 


 









Engaging Science Topics for College Students

Blog / By  

				Smore Science Staff			



		 /  June 9, 2024  








  


Jun 9 2024 


 









Excessive Internet Use Rewires Teen Brains, Impacting Decision-Making, Study Finds

Blog, Science News / By  

				Smore Science Staff			



		 /  June 6, 2024  








  


Jun 6 2024 


 









Not Just Woofs Anymore: How AI Might Decode Dog Vocalizations

Blog, Science News / By  

				Smore Science Staff			



		 /  June 6, 2024  








  


Jun 6 2024 


 




 


 





SUBSCRIBE TO OUR NEWSLETTER
..........      ..........
Subscribe to our mailing list to get updates to your email inbox.
Monthly Newsletter








*Invalid email address.


 
Yes! Sign Me Up Please

















 

 

















 


About Us
FAQ
My Account
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Science Kits
Affliate Program

Become an Affiliate Affiliate Login

Blog





X
 



















 







© 2019, Smore Science. All Rights Reserved.All Rights Reserved.  Stock Photos provided by our partner Depositphotos 







 





















 













Start typing and press enter to search 


Search...


  














Scroll to Top









  












































































 

//

