





Galileo Galilei: Biography, Inventions & Other Facts | Space






































 




































































 






  






 







Skip to main content







Open menu
Close menu






Space

















Space 




Search

 


Search Space



 



Subscribe



RSS




 

 

 

 

 





All About Space MagazineWhy subscribe?Jam packed issues filled with the latest cutting-edge research, technology and theories delivered in an entertaining and visually stunning way, aiming to educate and inspire readers of all agesEngaging articles, breathtaking images and expert knowledgeIssues delivered straight to your doorFrom$28.75View Deal












Space Exploration




The Universe




Stargazing




Launches & Spacecraft




Videos




The Moon




More




Solar System


Artemis


James Webb Space Telescope


Entertainment


Search for Life


Tech


Forums


Subscribe to "All about Space" magazine


Space.com Store


About Us


Web Notifications





 


 


TrendingSpaceX Starship Flight 4 launch video!Next Full MoonBest TelescopesBest BinocularsBest Star ProjectorsSpace CalendarLego Star Wars dealsBest DronesSolar System PlanetsNight Sky Tonight

When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.













The Universe


Solar System



Galileo Galilei: Biography, inventions & other facts


References
By Nola Taylor Tillman last updated 20 December 2021 

Galileo revolutionized our understanding of the universe




 



 



 








 



 



























Galileo was an Italian philosopher, mathematician, physicist and astronomer
(Image credit: ZU_09 via Getty)





Jump to:



Galileo's Experiments




Galileo's Telescope




Copernican System




Galileo Quotes








Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei provided a number of scientific insights that laid the foundation for future scientists. His investigation of the laws of motion and improvements on the telescope helped further the understanding of the world and universe around him. Both led him to question the current belief of the time — that all things revolved around the Earth. [See also our overview of Famous Astronomers and great scientists from many fields who have contributed to the rich history of discoveries in astronomy.]Galileo's ExperimentsThe Ancient Greek philosopher, Aristotle, taught that heavier objects fall faster than lighter ones, a belief still held in Galileo's lifetime. But Galileo wasn't convinced. Experimenting with balls of different sizes and weights, he rolled them down ramps with various inclinations. His experiments revealed that all of the balls boasted the same acceleration independent of their mass - although some modern physicists remain determined to prove him wrong. He also demonstrated that objects thrown in the air travel along a parabola.At the same time, Galileo worked with pendulums. In his life, accurate timekeeping was virtually nonexistent. Galileo observed, however, that the steady motion of a pendulum could improve this. In 1602, he determined that the time it takes a pendulum to swing back and forth does not depend on the arc of the swing. Near the end of his lifetime, Galileo designed the first pendulum clock.Galileo's TelescopeGalileo is often incorrectly credited with the creation of a telescope. (Hans Lippershey applied for the first patent in 1608, but others may have beaten him to the actual invention.) Instead, he significantly improved upon them. In 1609, he first learned of the existence of the spyglass, which excited him. He began to experiment with telescope-making, going so far as to grind and polish his own lenses. His telescope allowed him to see with a magnification of eight or nine times. In comparison, spyglasses of the day only provided a magnification of three. It wasn't long before Galileo turned his telescope to the heavens. He was the first to see craters on the moon, he discovered sunspots, and he tracked the phases of Venus. The rings of Saturn puzzled him, appearing as lobes and vanishing when they were edge-on — but he saw them, which was more than can be said of his contemporaries. Of all of his telescope discoveries, he is perhaps most known for his discovery of the four most massive moons of Jupiter, now known as the Galilean moons: Io, Ganymede, Europa and Callisto. When NASA sent a mission to Jupiter in the 1990s, it was called Galileo in honor of the famed astronomer.In his book "Sidereus Nuncius" ("Starry Messenger"), published in 1610, Galileo wrote:"On the 7th day of January in the present year, 1610, in the first hour of the following night, when I was viewing the constellations of the heavens through a telescope, the planet Jupiter presented itself to my view, and as I had prepared for myself a very excellent instrument, I noticed a circumstance which I had never been able to notice before, namely that three little stars, small but very bright, were near the planet; and although I believed them to belong to a number of the fixed stars, yet they made me somewhat wonder, because they seemed to be arranged exactly in a straight line, parallel to the ecliptic, and to be brighter than the rest of the stars, equal to them in magnitude . . . When on January 8th, led by some fatality, I turned again to look at the same part of the heavens, I found a very different state of things, for there were three little stars all west of Jupiter, and nearer together than on the previous night.""I therefore concluded, and decided unhesitatingly, that there are three stars in the heavens moving about Jupiter, as Venus and Mercury around the Sun; which was at length established as clear as daylight by numerous other subsequent observations. These observations also established that there are not only three, but four, erratic sidereal bodies performing their revolutions around Jupiter."Illustration of Galileo demonstrating his telescope (Image credit: Photos.com via Getty)Galileo may also have made the first recorded studies of the planet Neptune, though he didn't recognize it as a planet. While observing Jupiter's moons in 1612 and 1613, he recorded a nearby star whose position is not found in any modern catalogues."It has been known for several decades that this unknown star was actually the planet Neptune," University of Melbourne physicist David Jamieson told Space.com. "Computer simulations show the precision of his observations revealing that Neptune would have looked just like a faint star almost exactly where Galileo observed it."Copernican SystemIn Galileo's lifetime, all celestial bodies were thought to orbit the Earth. Supported by the Catholic Church, teaching opposite of this system was declared heresy in 1615.Galileo, however, did not agree. His research — including his observations of the phases of Venus and the fact that Jupiter boasted moons that didn't orbit Earth — supported the Copernican system, which (correctly) stated that the Earth and other planets circle the sun.A 19th century engraving of Galileo at the Inquisition  (Image credit: traveler1116 via Getty)In 1616, he was summoned to Rome and warned not to teach or write about this controversial theory. But in 1632, believing that he could write on the subject if he treated it as a mathematical proposition, he published work on the Copernican system. He was found guilty of heresy, and was placed under house arrest for the remaining nine years of his life.Today, Galileo is finally recognized for his groundbreaking discoveries, for which he is remembered as the "father of modern science".Related: 'Galileo Project' will search for evidence of extraterrestrial life from the technology it leaves behindGalileo Quotes"And yet it moves.""I have never met a man so ignorant that I couldn't learn something from him.""I do not feel obliged to believe that the same God who has endowed us with sense, reason, and intellect has intended us to forgo their use.""You cannot teach a man anything, you can only help him find it within himself.""It is a beautiful and delightful sight to behold the body of the Moon.""Wine is sunlight, held together by water."— Find other quotes at GoodReads.com.Additional resourcesRice University: The Galileo ProjectJPL: Galileo Mission to JupiterStanford University Solar Center: Galileo’s Discoveries


Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more! And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com.

Get the Space.com NewsletterBreaking space news, the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more!Contact me with news and offers from other Future brandsReceive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsorsBy submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over.
Nola Taylor TillmanSocial Links NavigationContributing WriterNola Taylor Tillman is a contributing writer for Space.com. She loves all things space and astronomy-related, and enjoys the opportunity to learn more. She has a Bachelor’s degree in English and Astrophysics from Agnes Scott college and served as an intern at Sky & Telescope magazine. In her free time, she homeschools her four children. Follow her on Twitter at @NolaTRedd
More about science astronomyChina lands Chang'e 6 sample-return probe on far side of the moon, a lunar success (video)Science and music festival Starmus VII is about to rock Bratislava with a stellar lineupLatestSandworms rise from the sands of Arrakis in exclusive sneak peek at 'Dune: The Graphic Novel, Book 3'See more latest ►







Most PopularWhat to do next with your solar viewing kit after the 2024 solar eclipseAnnular solar eclipse 2024: Everything you need to know about the next solar eclipseTop 5 items I recommend to safely observe the sun: Get solar eclipse readyEclipse seasons: Why the lunar eclipse on March 25 occurs 2 weeks before the total solar eclipse on April 87 things to buy to safely watch and photograph a solar eclipse10 phenomena to see and photograph during a total solar eclipseHow do astronauts use the bathroom in space?What are nacreous clouds?How to photograph a total solar eclipse with a smartphone 2024 — 8 tips from an expertEverything we know about 'Spaceman'Everything we know about Warhammer 40K: Space Marine 2



























MORE FROM SPACE...1Sandworms rise from the sands of Arrakis in exclusive sneak peek at 'Dune: The Graphic Novel, Book 3'2What is the 3-body problem, and is it really unsolvable?3Astronauts test SpaceX Starship hardware and spacesuits for Artemis 3 moon mission (photos)4'Stellar Dreams' project gifting 100 telescopes to 100 families (exclusive)5At long last: Europe's new Ariane 6 rocket set to debut on July 9













Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site.


About Us
Contact Future's experts
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies policy
Accessibility Statement
Advertise with us
Web notifications
Careers


©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. 


 

















 
