General vector spaces - Linear algebra | ElevriElevri logoCoursesLinear algebraCalculus (one variable)Calculus (several variables)PrecalculusAbout usJobs🇺🇸 English... Linear algebraGeneral vector spacesGeneral vector spacesVector spaces does not need to be built up by numbers, they could be applied from a far more general approach. A popular application in a course of linear algebra is to cover polynomial spaces, where each element in the space is a polynomial. Confused? it can be at start, but it’s not as hard as it seems at first glance. The crucial thing is to know the axioms defining a vector space V, and sticking to them. Those axioms are
      

Space V is closed under addition and scalar multiplication
Addition is both commutative and associative
Scalar multiplication is both commutative and associative
Existence of an identity and inverse for addition 
Existence of an identity and inverse for scalar multiplication
Table of contentsIntroOne of the most groundbreaking scientific theories of all time is quantum mechanics. It can be used in many interesting fields such as quantum tunneling, which is a kind of teleportation.  Although quantum mechanics tells us that we can not know the speed and position of a particle at the same time, the theory enables us to build quantum computers that could solve a problem in seconds that would take an ordinary computer billions of years to solve.  In quantum physics we find that the electron orbits the nucleus of an atom in very interesting shapes, like the one below. These shapes are called states.The states an electron is in can be explained with a vector and two different states are always orthonormal to each other.ConceptWe can define vector space as:The continuous region within which all vectors exist and movesWe can think of a vector as being able to move in two different ways, without leaving the vector space:Through being added by another vectorThrough being multiplied by any numberLastly, the vectors' capability of being moved by any amount, correspond to continuity.MathFormally, a vector space is a non-empty set   of objects obeying addition and scalar multiplication according to the rules known as the ten vector space axioms.  Let   ,   , and    be in  , and let   and   be scalars. Then   is a vector space if and only if:  is closed under addition; that is, if    and    are in  , then      is in                 contains an object    (called the zero vector) that behaves like an additive zero in the sense that       for every    in  For each object    in  , there is an object     in   (called the negative of   ) such that           is closed under multiplication: that is, if    is in   and   is scalar, then     is in  .                           General vector spacesIntroductionThis is the beginning of the end, at least for a conventional linear algebra course. We have studied vectors, matrices and spaces. Many people think that these concepts are quite abstract, but everything is relative. Mathematicians often like to distinguish between the categories of mathematics and calculations, where linear algebra belongs to the latter. This may sound provocative, especially after hard work to learn the content, but the intention is purely academic. We intend that this lecture note should be helpful for the student to appreciate the differences, and hopefully inspire them to learn more about the world of abstract algebra.  Mathematics is a logical endeavor, much like the studies of philosophy and law. It requires analytical and abstract thinking, because the goal is to prove insights, and to see if found relationships can be generalized. Sometimes, a discovery is merely a practical tip of the ice berg, where the truth beneath the surface, can be proven to be much greater.A generalization of vector spacesWe generalize the concept of vector space by specifying the requirements that allow a general set of objects with two operations to be seen as a vector space. We now have a practical association with addition, scalars, multiplication and vectors.Generalization does not mean that we add information. This means that we subtract information.The generalization process does not mean that we add knowledge to the context, it means on the contrary that we subtract learned knowledge. We begin with this brief summary of the core properties of subspaces:All subspaces are closed under scalar multiplication and addition.All subspaces contain the vector    and the vectors in the subspace satisfy the algebraic properties from addition and scalar multiplication.Now we take the next step by defining what we mean by addition and scalar multiplication (remember - we generalize concepts). Try reading the following sections for the first time.The vector space axiomsLet   be a nonempty set of objects, of which we introduce two operations:By addition we mean a rule for associating with each pair of objects    and    in   a unique object      that we regard to the be sum of    and   .By scalar multiplication we mean a rule for associating with each scalar   and each object    in   a unique object     that we regard to be the scalar product of    by  .Note that we reuse the terms addition and multiplication, but we are open to how the operations are defined. We call   a vector space and we call the objects   ,    and    vectors if they satisfy the following ten axioms called the vector space axioms:If      and    are objects in  , and if   and   are scalars, then we call the set   a vector space if the below axioms are satisfied for the two operations addition and scalar multiplication respectively:  is closed under addition; that is, if    and    are in  , then      is in                 contains an object    (called the zero vector) that behaves like an additive zero in the sense that       for every    in  For each object    in  , there is an object     in   (called the negative of   ) such that           is closed under multiplication: that is, if    is in   and   is scalar, then     is in  .                           Thinking abstractly is the process of letting go of delimiting conditions and trying to think minimalistically and newly. If the above statements did not invite a challenge, perhaps the following statement can do just that:If    is a vector in a vector space  , and if   is a scalar, then we have:               Look at the first property from above theorem:    The first property of the above theorem is so intuitive that it makes it difficult to suggest anything else, right? Surely a scalar   should result in the zero vector   , when multiplied with any vector   ? Well, of course you get that result with the conventional definition of scalar multiplication, which means that we multiply the scalar by each component of the vector   . But what if we leave the precise definition of the operation, and approach this with an abstract mindset. Let's say we do not know how the operation of scalar multiplication works. What we do know are the original ten vector space axioms. Here is a six-step proof of      which is supported only by the ten vector space axioms:                To the right of each step we have    , referring to which of the ten axioms has been used to support the result. The step      refers to the property of real numbers. See how abstract each step in the proof is, and how we do not divide the vectors into components. Therefore, the proof applies to all objects that may be called vectors for all sets called vector space. We summarize here the three proofs for the three statements in the above theorem:                   where the last line of the last proof refers to the result of the first proof. This is a beautiful concept, both used in mathematics as in philosophy, that we reuse our results from previous reasoning to prove new ones. We now move forward with three examples of vector spaces, namely function spaces, polynomial spaces and matrix spaces.Function spacesA commonly visited vector space in higher studies in mathematics are function spaces, and especially real-valued ones. Let's go from our conventional view of a vector       so that:          and move to regarding each component of    to represent a function value. Let's say that we have              which gives us:                   In the example above, we refer the vector    as a 3-tuple, which means a finite sequence of three. In general, we are talking about n-tuples. If we would plot the vector    we would have three points:         in a two-dimensional graph with the axes   as horizontal axis and      as the vertical axis. But, we are used from calculus to plotting graphs across the board with real numbers, which means we can take it to the next level and consider:    We can extend our notion of a function valued vector to cover every single real number, giving us the vector    with infinitely many components, one for each real number:               So we have that       and that the     component for that vector is     . Pretty cool huh? We here denote the set of real-valued functions that are defined for all real values of    by       , and let's agree that two functions belonging to this set,   and  , are considered to be equal if, and only if,           where the sign   means "for all". So how should we define the operators addition and scalar multiplication? this is typically kept simple and conventionally defined as:             Such a function space       , with the above operations for addition and scalar multiplication, is defined as a vector space because it satisfies all of the vector space axioms.Polynomial spacesTaking it from function spaces, we can let   be a non-negative integer and let    be the set of all real-valued functions in the form:           where        are real numbers. This means that    is the set of all polynomials of degree   or less. We have that   , with the same definitions for addition and scalar multiplication as for       , is a vector space. Even more, it's a subspace to       . To show this we need to show that    is closed under addition and scalar multiplication. Let's have that   and   are in   :               Thus, we have for the scalar multiplication:               As for the addition operation we have that:                which shows that    and     both are polynomials of degree   or less, hence belonging to the polynomial space   .  The polynomial space    is interesting because we can define a beautiful basis for this vector space. We remember that the definition of a basis for a vector space is that the basis should be linearly independent and span the entire space. This means that we should have a unique linear combination for each of the polynomials to   . There are several bases that serve this purpose, here comes the trivial one:          Do you see what a linear combination of this basis would look like? For each     we have a unique set of coordinates          such that:          Isn't this beautiful?Matrix spacesAnother fascinating variant of vector spaces are matrix spaces. Sure, it may sound counterintuitive to consider matrices as vectors. But remember - a generalization is not adding information, it is subtracting the limitations of what is already known. So, let's say that     is the matrix space with all the     matrices with real numbers. This means, that     vectors belong to this matrix space, which we recognize, according to our old definition, as a vector. We let addition and scalar multiplication operations for matrices be the same as we are used to seeing them. Then we have that this space is closed under addition and scalar multiplication, because the dimensions of the vectors do not change. Let us take a more concrete example, and examine the following matrix space    of    matrices. What would a suitable basis look like? Again, there are infinite number of bases to choose from, but we keep it simple. We have that         form a basis for   , since for each    in this vector space we have that:          Hence,   forms a basis for   .An unusual vector spaceNow is the time for an intellectual challenge. We have given several examples of vector spaces, but they have all had the conventional definitions of addition and scalar multiplication. We will now introduce two new operations, while also consider real numbers as vectors.   Let's consider   as the set of all positive real numbers, which we call vectors and denote the following notation   ,    and   . For any real number   and any vectors    and    in   we define the operations   and   as our addition and scalar multiplication respectively, according to the following:      (addition)      (scalar multiplication)Both    and    are positive numbers, so they belong to the space   and the results are therefore considered as vectors to that space. This is a good exercise in generalization, where we subtract what we know and consider something else. But does this makes sense? are the ten vector space axioms fulfilled for this set   with the above operations   and  ? If so,   is a vector space. We confirm the axioms below. It makes a pretty solid list, but there are no shortcuts to confirm each axiom. Take your time and read carefully.Let   be the set of all real positive numbers and let        and scalar   be any real number. For the following two definitions for addition and scalar multiplication respectively,      (addition)      (scalar multiplication)we have that   is a vector space.                              A note for axiom 7 - the conventional definition for addition applies for scalars between each other, since they are not considered as vectors of  . However, a scalar multiplied by a vector of   must follow the new definitions.Table of contentsEnjoy this topic? Please help us and share it.TwitterRedditFacebookQuadratic formGeneral linear transformationsGood outline for linear algebra and short to-do listWe work hard to provide you with short, concise and educational knowledge. Contrary to what many books do.Get exam problems for old linear algebra exams divided into chaptersThe trick is to both learn the theory and practice on exam problems. We have categorized them to make it extra easy.© 2024 Elevri. All rights reserved.