 









Hans Bethe – Biographical - NobelPrize.org
















 



















 




Skip to content 















Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed



Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed





Close Mobile Menu






Toggle Mobile Menu 





Nobel Prizes & laureates

All Nobel Prizes
Nobel Prizes 2023
Physics prize
Chemistry prize
Medicine prize
Literature prize
Peace prize
Prize in economic sciences


About

About the prize
Alfred Nobel
Award ceremonies
Nomination
Organisation


Stories
Educational
Events & museums



Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed



Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed











Header Search 



Submit a search term
Allows users to submit a search term










		Enhanced Page Navigation	



					Hans Bethe - Biographical				










The Nobel Prize in Physics 1967 





Summary

LaureatesHans Bethe

Facts



Biographical



Nobel Lecture



Banquet speech



Photo gallery



Other resources



Speed read



Presentation Speech





Share this 





Facebook 






X 






LinkedIn 






Email this page 









Hans Bethe 

Biographical 


Navigate to:
 Summary-- Facts-- Biographical-- Nobel Lecture-- Banquet speech-- Photo gallery-- Other resources Speed read Presentation Speech

Hans Albrecht Bethe was born in Strasbourg, Alsace-Lorraine, on July 2 1906. He attended the Gymnasium in Frankfurt from 1915 to 1924. He then studied at the University of Frankfurt for two years, and at Munich for two and one half years, taking his Ph. D. in theoretical physics with Professor Arnold Sommerfeld in July 1928.
He then was an Instructor in physics at Frankfurt and at Stuttgart for one semester each. From fall 1929 to fall 1933 his headquarters were the University of Munich where he became Privatdozent in May 1930. During this time he had a travel fellowship of the International Education Board to go to Cambridge, England, in the fall of 1930, and to Rome in the spring terms of 1931 and 1932. In the winter semester of 1932-1933,he held a position as Acting Assistant Professor at the University of Tubingen which he lost due to the advent of the Nazi regime in Germany.
Bethe emigrated to England in October 1933 where he held a temporary position as Lecturer at the University of Manchester for the year 1933-1934, and a fellowship at the University of Bristol in the fall of 1934. In February 1935 he was appointed Assistant Professor at Cornell University, Ithaca, N. Y. U.S.A., then promoted to Professor in the summer of 1937. He has stayed there ever since, except for sabbatical leaves and for an absence during World War II. His war work took him first to the Radiation Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, working on microwave radar, and then to the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory which was engaged in assembling the first atomic bomb. He returned to Los Alamos for half a year in 1952. Two of his sabbatical leaves were spent at Columbia University, one at the University of Cambridge, and one at CERN and Copenhagen.
Bethe’s main work is concerned with the theory of atomic nuclei. Together with Peierls, he developed a theory of the deuteron in 1934 which he extended in 1949. He resolved some contradictions in the nuclear mass scale in 1935. He studied the theory of nuclear reactions in 1935-1938, predicting many reaction cross sections. In connection with this work, he developed Bohr’s theory of the compound nucleus in a more quantitative fashion. This work and also the existing knowledge on nuclear theory and experimental results, was summarized in three articles in the Reviews of Modern Physics which for many years served as a textbook for nuclear physicists.
His work on nuclear reactions led Bethe to the discovery of the reactions which supply the energy in the stars. The most important nuclear reaction in the brilliant stars is the carbon-nitrogen cycle, while the sun and fainter stars use mostly the proton-proton reaction. Bethe’s main achievement in this connection was the exclusion of other possible nuclear reactions. The Nobel Prize was given for this work, as well as his work on nuclear reactions in general.
In 1955 Bethe returned to the theory of nuclei, emphasizing a different phase. He has worked since then on the theory of nuclear matter whose aim it is to explain the properties of atomic nuclei in terms of the forces acting between nucleons.
Before his work on nuclear physics, Bethe’s main attention was given to atomic physics and collision theory. On the former subject, he wrote a review article in Handbuch der Physik in which he filled in the gaps of the existing knowledge, and which is still up-to-date. In collision theory, he developed a simple and powerful theory of inelastic collisions between fast particles and atoms which he has used to determine the stopping power of matter for fast charged particles, thus providing a tool to nuclear physicists. Turning to more energetic collisions, he calculated with Heitler the bremsstrahlung emitted by relativistic electrons, and the production of electron pairs by high energy gamma rays.
Bethe also did some work on solid-state theory. He discussed the splitting of atomic energy levels when an atom is inserted into a crystal, he did some work on the theory of metals, and especially he developed a theory of the order and disorder in alloys.
In 1947, Bethe was the first to explain the Lamb-shift in the hydrogen spectrum, and he thus laid the foundation for the modern development of quantum electrodynamics. Later on, he worked with a large number of collaborators on the scattering of pi mesons and on their production by electromagnetic radiation.
Bethe is married to the daughter of P.P. Ewald, the well-known X-ray physicist. They have two children, Henry and Monica.


From Nobel Lectures, Physics 1963-1970, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1972



This autobiography/biography was written
at the time of the award and first
published in the book series Les Prix Nobel.
It was later edited and republished in Nobel Lectures. To cite this document, always state the source as shown above.

Hans Bethe died on March 6, 2005.


Copyright © The Nobel Foundation 1967




To cite this section 
MLA style: Hans Bethe – Biographical. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2024. Wed. 12 Jun 2024. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1967/bethe/biographical/> 



Back to top 

Back To Top
Takes users back to the top of the page

















Nobel Prizes and laureates







Nobel Prizes 2023 




Eleven laureates were awarded a Nobel Prize in 2023, for achievements that have conferred the greatest benefit to humankind. Their work and discoveries range from effective mRNA vaccines and attosecond physics to fighting against the oppression of women.See them all presented here. 


 





Explore prizes and laureates 

Look for popular awards and laureates in different fields, and discover the history of the Nobel Prize. 




Select the category or categories you would like to filter by 


Physics 

Chemistry 

Medicine 

Literature 

Peace 

Economic Sciences 



Select the category or categories you would like to filter by




Physics 






Chemistry 






Medicine 






Literature 






Peace 






Economic Sciences 





Decrease the year by one 

- 

Choose a year you would like to search in 


Increase the year by one 

+ 



Explore 















About the Nobel Prize organisation 



The Nobel Foundation 
Tasked with a mission to manage Alfred Nobel's fortune and has ultimate responsibility for fulfilling the intentions of Nobel's will.



The prize-awarding institutions 
For more than a century, these academic institutions have worked independently to select Nobel Prize laureates.



Outreach organisations 
Several outreach organisations and activities have been developed to inspire generations and disseminate knowledge about the Nobel Prize.





Press
Contact
FAQ



Privacy policy
Technical support
Terms of use



For developers
Media player




Join us 
 
Facebook

 
Twitter

 
Instagram

 
Youtube

 
LinkedIn








The Nobel Prize 



Copyright © Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2024 

















