 









Hans Bethe – Facts - NobelPrize.org
















 



















 




Skip to content 















Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed



Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed





Close Mobile Menu






Toggle Mobile Menu 





Nobel Prizes & laureates

All Nobel Prizes
Nobel Prizes 2023
Physics prize
Chemistry prize
Medicine prize
Literature prize
Peace prize
Prize in economic sciences


About

About the prize
Alfred Nobel
Award ceremonies
Nomination
Organisation


Stories
Educational
Events & museums



Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed



Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed











Header Search 



Submit a search term
Allows users to submit a search term










		Enhanced Page Navigation	



					Hans Bethe - Facts				










The Nobel Prize in Physics 1967 





Summary

LaureatesHans Bethe

Facts



Biographical



Nobel Lecture



Banquet speech



Photo gallery



Other resources



Speed read



Presentation Speech





Share this 





Facebook 






X 






LinkedIn 






Email this page 









Hans Bethe 
Facts


Navigate to:
 Summary-- Facts-- Biographical-- Nobel Lecture-- Banquet speech-- Photo gallery-- Other resources Speed read Presentation Speech

Photo from the Nobel Foundation archive. 


Hans Albrecht Bethe
The Nobel Prize in Physics 1967 
Born: 2 July 1906, Strasbourg, Germany (now France) 
Died: 6 March 2005, Ithaca, NY, USA 

Affiliation at the time of the award:
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 

Prize motivation: “for his contributions to the theory of nuclear reactions, especially his discoveries concerning the energy production in stars” 

Prize share: 1/1 



Life 

Hans Bethe was born in Strasbourg and studied in Frankfurt and Munich. When the Nazis took power in 1933, Bethe was dismissed from his post in Tübingen and emigrated via England to the U.S. He became a professor at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, where he stayed for the rest of his career. During World War II, he took part in developing the atomic bomb and introductory work on the hydrogen bomb, but he subsequently opposed nuclear weapons. In 1939 he married Rose Ewald, with whom he had one son and one daughter.




Work 

The discovery of fission—the splitting of heavy nuclei—revealed the liberation of large quantities of energy; an effect now exploited in nuclear reactors. This energy is generated by differences in mass. Energy is also liberated when light nuclei combine to form heavier ones, i.e. fusion. In 1938, Hans Bethe proved that fusion produces the enormous energy emitted by stars. He proposed two different processes, both of which result in hydrogen nuclei fusing with helium nuclei.




To cite this section 
MLA style: Hans Bethe – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2024. Wed. 12 Jun 2024. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1967/bethe/facts/> 



Back to top 

Back To Top
Takes users back to the top of the page

















Nobel Prizes and laureates







Nobel Prizes 2023 




Eleven laureates were awarded a Nobel Prize in 2023, for achievements that have conferred the greatest benefit to humankind. Their work and discoveries range from effective mRNA vaccines and attosecond physics to fighting against the oppression of women.See them all presented here. 


 





Explore prizes and laureates 

Look for popular awards and laureates in different fields, and discover the history of the Nobel Prize. 




Select the category or categories you would like to filter by 


Physics 

Chemistry 

Medicine 

Literature 

Peace 

Economic Sciences 



Select the category or categories you would like to filter by




Physics 






Chemistry 






Medicine 






Literature 






Peace 






Economic Sciences 





Decrease the year by one 

- 

Choose a year you would like to search in 


Increase the year by one 

+ 



Explore 















About the Nobel Prize organisation 



The Nobel Foundation 
Tasked with a mission to manage Alfred Nobel's fortune and has ultimate responsibility for fulfilling the intentions of Nobel's will.



The prize-awarding institutions 
For more than a century, these academic institutions have worked independently to select Nobel Prize laureates.



Outreach organisations 
Several outreach organisations and activities have been developed to inspire generations and disseminate knowledge about the Nobel Prize.





Press
Contact
FAQ



Privacy policy
Technical support
Terms of use



For developers
Media player




Join us 
 
Facebook

 
Twitter

 
Instagram

 
Youtube

 
LinkedIn








The Nobel Prize 



Copyright © Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2024 

















