



Hans Bethe | Biography, Career & Discovery | Study.com













































for Teachers
for Schools
for Working Scholars®
for College Credit


























Log In


Sign Up

Menu
					










									Plans
							



									Subjects
							





Art


Business


Computer Science


Education & Teaching


English


Health & Medicine


History


Humanities


Math


Psychology


Science


Social Science







							 
						



									Art
							



									Architecture 




									Art History 




									Design 




									Performing Arts 




									Visual Arts 






							 
						



									Business
							



									Accounting 




									Business Administration 




									Business Communication 




									Business Ethics 




									Business Intelligence 




									Business Law 




									Economics 




									Finance 




									Healthcare Administration 




									Human Resources 




									Information Technology 




									International Business 




									Operations Management 




									Real Estate 




									Sales & Marketing 






							 
						



									Computer Science
							



									Computer Engineering 




									Computer Programming 




									Cybersecurity 




									Data Science 




									Software 






							 
						



									Education & Teaching
							



									Education Law & Policy 




									Pedagogy & Teaching Strategies 




									Special & Specialized Education 




									Student Support in Education 




									Teaching English Language Learners 






							 
						



									English
							



									Grammar 




									Literature 




									Public Speaking 




									Reading 




									Vocabulary 




									Writing & Composition 






							 
						



									Health & Medicine
							



									Counseling & Therapy 




									Health 




									Medicine 




									Nursing 




									Nutrition 






							 
						



									History
							



									US History 




									World History 






							 
						



									Humanities
							



									Communication 




									Ethics 




									Foreign Languages 




									Philosophy 




									Religious Studies 






							 
						



									Math
							



									Algebra 




									Basic Math 




									Calculus 




									Geometry 




									Statistics 




									Trigonometry 






							 
						



									Psychology
							



									Clinical & Abnormal Psychology 




									Cognitive Science 




									Developmental Psychology 




									Educational Psychology 




									Organizational Psychology 




									Social Psychology 






							 
						



									Science
							



									Anatomy & Physiology 




									Astronomy 




									Biology 




									Chemistry 




									Earth Science 




									Engineering 




									Environmental Science 




									Physics 






							 
						



									Social Science
							



									Anthropology 




									Criminal Justice 




									Geography 




									Law 




									Linguistics 




									Political Science 




									Sociology 







									Courses
							





By Subject


By Education Level


Adult Education


Transferable Credit







							By Subject
						



									Arts 




									Business 




									Computer Science 




									Education & Teaching 




									English (ELA) 




									Foreign Language 




									Health & Medicine 




									History 




									Humanities 




									Math 




									Psychology 




									Science 




									Social Science 






							By Education Level
						



									Elementary School 




									Middle School 




									High School 




									College 




									Graduate and Post-Grad 







									Test Prep
							





Teacher Certification Exams


Nursing Exams


Allied Health & Medicine Exams


Real Estate Exams


All Test Prep







							 
						



									Teacher Certification Exams
							



									Praxis 




									FTCE 




									TExES 




									CSET & CBEST 




									More Teacher Certification Test Prep 






							 
						



									Nursing Exams
							



									NCLEX 




									HESI 




									More Nursing Test Prep 






							 
						



									Allied Health & Medicine Exams
							



									ASCP 




									CNA 




									CNS 




									More Medical Test Prep 






							 
						



									Real Estate Exams
							



									Real Estate Sales 




									Real Estate Brokers 




									Real Estate Appraisals 







									Teach
							





Teaching Resources and Curriculum


Skills Practice


Lesson Plans


Teacher Certification


Teacher Professional Development








									Tutoring
							





Math Tutoring


Science Tutoring


Business Tutoring


Humanities Tutoring







							 
						



									Math Tutoring
							



									Algebra  Tutoring




									Calculus  Tutoring




									Geometry  Tutoring




									Pre-calculus  Tutoring




									Statistics  Tutoring




									Trigonometry  Tutoring






							 
						



									Science Tutoring
							



									Biology  Tutoring




									Chemistry  Tutoring




									Physics  Tutoring






							 
						



									Business Tutoring
							



									Accounting  Tutoring




									Economics  Tutoring




									Finance  Tutoring






							 
						



									Humanities Tutoring
							



									History  Tutoring




									Literature  Tutoring




									Writing  Tutoring






Sign Up

































 Science Courses
			
			/
			
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	

	
	
	
		
		
		
		
		
			
Significant Physicists Study Guide
Course




		Hans Bethe | Biography, Career & Discovery
	






Lesson



						
							
								Additional Info
							
							
						
					




					Tanya Baldwin, Michael Blosser
			


Author

Tanya Baldwin
Tanya graduated from Concord University with a Bachelor's degree in Education and a certification in Social Studies 5-12. She holds a Master's degree in Secondary Education from Marshall University.  Tanya has over 16 years of experience teaching various social studies subjects.  

					View bio
				


Instructor

Michael Blosser
Michael has a Masters in Physics and a Masters in International Development. He has over 5 years of teaching experience, teaching Physics, Math, and English classes.

					View bio
				



							Learn Hans Albrecht Bethe's biography and facts. Explore Hans Bethe and his physics and what he discovered that is very significant to the history of the world.
						
								
									Updated: 11/21/2023
								







Frequently Asked Questions



What was Hans Bethe most famous for?

Hans Bethe is most famous for helping found the field of quantum physics and his research regarding atomic processes. He played a role in development of the first atomic bomb and also the hydrogen bomb. He won a Nobel Prize in 1967 for his scientific work.



What did Hans Bethe discover?

Hans Bethe made many scientific discoveries. He was one of the founders of quantum physics. His research led to the understanding of atomic processes involved in nuclear physics. He also made discoveries in astrophysics, electrodynamics, and other areas of physics.



What did Hans Bethe do in the Manhattan Project?

Bethe was the head of the theoretical division at the Los Alamos lab for the Manhattan Project. He calculated critical mass and made predictions regarding bomb efficiency.












		Create an account
		




Table of ContentsHans Bethe Biography Early Work and Career The Nobel Prize Award What Did Hans Bethe Discover? Lesson SummaryShow 






Hans Bethe Biography



Hans Albrecht Bethe was born on July 2, 1906 in Strasburg, Germany. At an early age, it became evident that Bethe was highly intelligent. He began reading and writing at the age of four. His teacher at the local gymnasium also recognized his mathematical talents and advised him to continue his studies after graduation. He took the teacher's advice and began studies at the University of Frankfurt, and later continued at the University of Munich. At Munich, he studied with Arnold Sommerfeld, who immediately recognized Bethe's exceptional abilities with physics. In 1928, Bethe was awarded his doctorate based on his dissertation on electron diffraction, which is the diffraction of a beam of electrons by atoms or molecules that are used for determining crystal structures. Bethe went on to become a world-renowned physicist.In 1930, Bethe became a Rockefeller Foundation Fellow. This allowed him to spend a semester at the University of Cambridge and another semester at the University of Rome. In 1933, Bethe, whose mother was Jewish, left Germany as Adolf Hitler and the Nazis rose to power. It would have been extremely dangerous for him to remain in Germany, so he initially fled to England. In 1935 he accepted a position at Cornell University and moved to the United States, where he settled in Ithaca, NY. At Cornell, Hans Bethe continued to make numerous advances in the field of physics. He remained there for the rest of his life, where he continued his work with particle physics and became a spokesperson for nuclear disarmament. He passed away in 2005 at the age of 98.

Hans Bethe













								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account













									Lesson
							



									Quiz
								



									Course
								



						














	
	
							1.1K
							views







Early Work and Career



After fleeing Nazi Germany, Bethe became head of the theoretical physics division of the Manhattan Project, which was the codename for the project to develop an atomic bomb for the United States. In 1933 and 1934, the theoretical physics division worked on neutrons, critical mass, and efficiency calculations for a thermonuclear atomic bomb. Bethe also worked on the initial phases of the hydrogen bomb. After the end of the war, Bethe returned to Cornell and continued working as an advisor on nuclear reactors.
From 1943-1946, Bethe worked as the head of the theoretical physics division of the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratories. Bethe worked with several brilliant scientists at the facility. After he left, he brought other outstanding physicists including Richard Feynman, with him to Cornell. They worked on high-energy elementary particle physics. Bethe, Feynman, and their team of physicists helped develop quantum electrodynamics. Electrodynamics is the application of quantum mechanics to electrical interactions. Hans Bethe and his physics studies led to many new scientific developments. Bethe approached physics as an experimental science, so he implemented calculations to observe and interpret scientific activities.From 1956-1964 Bethe served on the President's Science Advisory Committee. In addition to teaching, he published articles on nuclear physics. The writings summarized what he knew about nuclear structure and reactions. His articles presented a summary of what had been learned about physics and people began referring to the work as 'Bethe's Bible.'






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account















The Nobel Prize Award



In 1939, Bethe's work, "Energy Production in Stars," was published in the scientific journal Physical Review. In this paper, he discussed his theory of stellar fuel. He explained that carbon can change four atoms of hydrogen into an atom of helium with an atomic weight of four. He stated that during this transformation, there is only a small loss of mass that is converted into a tremendous amount of energy that in turn, energizes the stars. He discovered that the carbon-nitrogen cycle is the most important nuclear reaction for the stars. He believed the sun and other stars got their energy from a series of thermonuclear reactions. For his work on this and other discoveries on nuclear reaction, Bethe was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1967. In other writings, he introduced the theory of electron-positron pair creation and offered a different view on the theory of how charged particles interact.At the 1938 Washington Conference on Theoretical Physics, stellar energy generation was a topic of discussion. One of the presenters discussed the composition of the sun, which is a star. The speaker then challenged the attending physicists to explain stellar energy generation. Bethe discussed the topic with others, including Charles Critchfield. By the end of the conference, Bethe and Critchfield had figured out that it was a series of nuclear reactions that made the sun shine. However, the process in heavier stars was not explained. This led Bethe to study other nuclear reactions and resulted in his discovery of the carbon-oxygen-nitrogen cycle. Bethe and Critchfield worked together on writing a paper to explain this new information and the article was published in the Physical Review. This became part of Bethe's work that led to his Nobel Prize Award in 1967.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







What Did Hans Bethe Discover?



Throughout his career, Bethe worked in various areas of physics. He worked in quantum physics, nuclear physics, astrophysics, and electrodynamics. Hans Bethe helped found the field of quantum physics, which is the study of matter and energy at the most fundamental level. He worked for the United States on the development of the atomic bomb and identified the critical mass of bombs.
Working in astrophysics, Bethe calculated how stars produce light and use energy. In 1938, Bethe proved that fusion, which occurs when two light atoms bond together, or fuse, together to make a heavier one, produces energy emitted by the stars.While working on the Manhattan Project, Bethe calculated the critical mass and efficiency of uranium -235 as well as the multiplication of nuclear fission in an exploding atomic bomb. This led to the creation of the first hydrogen bomb in 1951.Despite the scientific and nuclear advances Bethe made, he eventually became a vocal critic of nuclear weapons. In 1963, he was involved in negotiations with the Soviet Union regarding the Limited Test Ban Treaty. He also spoke out against President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative missile system and was an advocate of using nuclear energy in a peaceful manner.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Lesson Summary



Hans Albrecht Bethe was a German-American nuclear physicist who made significant contributions to the scientific community and the world. Born in Munich, Germany, he later made his way to the United States. His decision to leave was made after Adolf Hitler and his Nazi regime came to power. Since Bethe was of Jewish descent, Nazi Germany was not a safe place for him. Once in the United States, Bethe became a professor at Cornell University in New York, where he remained for most of the duration of his career. Hans Bethe helped found the field of quantum physics, which is the study of matter and energy at the most fundamental level. In addition to quantum physics, Bethe also worked in nuclear physics and astrophysics. For his work on stellar energy and other discoveries on nuclear reaction, Bethe was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1967.Bethe was involved with the Manhattan Project and helped develop nuclear weapons. He was head of the Theoretical Physics Division in Los Alamos where he worked on the development of the first atomic bomb and later hydrogen bomb. Although he was involved in the development of these weapons, he later became an outspoken critic of nuclear bombs. He advocated for the safe, peaceful use of nuclear power. He passed away in 2005 at the age of 98.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account










														
														Additional Info
													



Hans Bethe: A Political PhysicistHans Bethe was a famous German-American physicist who made significant contributions to various fields of physics such as quantum physics, astrophysics, and nuclear physics. As well, throughout his life, Hans Bethe spoke out about the societal role of science and other political topics such as the proliferation of nuclear weapons. This lesson will introduce you to the life, personal views, and scientific contributions of the great physicist Hans Bethe. 


   Hans Bethe 
 





Childhood and Early Life''Stars have a life cycle much like animals. They get born, they grow, they go through a definite internal development, and finally they die, to give back the material of which they are made so that new stars may live.'' -Hans Bethe Hans Bethe was born in 1906 in Strasbourg, France (at that time it was a part of the German Empire) to his parents Albrecht and Ella. His scientific and mathematical ability showed at an early age and Hans Bethe attended the University of Frankfurt studying theoretical physics. Bethe's prowess at physics was more than what was being offered at the University of Frankfurt and he was advised to finish his studies at the University of Munich where he studied under the legendary physicist Arnold Sommerfeld. It was there were Hans obtained his PhD in physics, doing so in 1928 with a dissertation on the electron diffraction in crystals. In 1932 Hans obtained a professorship at the University of Tübingen in 1932 but when Adolf Hitler rose to power, Hans was dismissed due to his maternal grandparents being Jewish. Hans fled Germany and eventually made his way to Cornell University in Ithaca, New York in 1935 where he would work and live the rest of his life. Career''No one any longer pays attention to - if I may call it - the spirit of physics, the idea of discovery, the idea of understanding. I think it's difficult to make clear to the non-physicist the beauty of how it fits together, of how you can build a world picture, and the beauty that the laws of physics are immutable.'' -Hans Bethe Hans Bethe's early work at Cornell University focused on nuclear physics but it was at the 1938 Washington Conference, convinced to go by his friend and fellow physicist Edward Teller, where Hans made the discoveries of the energy generation in stars that he would publish in the 1939 scientific journal Physical Review. This paper would lead to him being awarded the 1967 Nobel Prize in physics. Hans Bethe also made significant contributions to the field of quantum physics, the laws of physics at the atomic and subatomic level, writing a book review on the quantum theory of helium and hydrogen (one and two electron systems) and made significant contributions to the field of quantum electrodynamics with the famous physics Richard Feynman and how it could be used to make predictions of atomic structure. Work on Nuclear Weapons and Social Responsibility Philosophy''If we fight a war and win it with H-bombs, what history will remember is not the ideals we were fighting for, but the methods we used to accomplish them. These methods will be compared to the warfare of Genghis Khan who ruthlessly killed every last inhabitant of Persia.'' -Hans Bethe 


During World War II, soon after gaining his American citizenship, Hans Bethe got heavily involved in the Manhattan Project, the US military project to discover the atomic bomb, being the head of the theoretical physics division. After making significant contributions to the creation of nuclear weapons, Hans investigated the possibility of making fusion bombs which eventually led to the creation of the first hydrogen bomb in 1951. Soon after this Hans become a vocal critic of nuclear weapons and even demanded in 1995 that scientists take a ''Hippocratic Oath'' to not work on nuclear weapons and was one of the first members of the Union of Concerned Scientists. Hans Bethe continued to make contributions well into his 90s, eventually succumbing to old age at the age of March 6, 2005 at the age of 98. Lesson SummaryHans Bethe is a famous German-American physicist who made significant contributions to the fields of nuclear physics, quantum physics, atomic physics, and quantum electrodynamics. He spent most of his career at Cornell University and his 1939 paper on the energy generation of stars earned him the 1967 Nobel Prize in Physics. Hans was forced to flee Germany due to his maternal grandparents being of Jewish descent during Adolf Hitler's rise to power and Hans was heavily involved in the Manhattan Project and the creation of the H-Bomb. Soon thereafter, Hans was a vocal critic against nuclear weapons and was seen as the ''conscience'' of the scientific community.






			
				
				
					To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
				
			
			
			
Create your account













Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?


				I am a student
			

 I am a teacher
			



Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 30 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In

 Back
					


Resources created by teachers for teachers
Over 30,000 video lessons
		& teaching resources‐all
		in one place.
	






Video lessons





Quizzes & Worksheets





Classroom Integration





Lesson Plans



I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues. It’s like a teacher waved a magic wand and did the work for me. I feel like it’s a lifeline.



			Jennifer B.
		

				Teacher
				
				
			

































    
    
		Try it now
	




 Back
	











		Start today. Try it now
		




Table of ContentsHans Bethe Biography Early Work and Career The Nobel Prize Award What Did Hans Bethe Discover? Lesson SummaryShow 






Significant Physicists Study Guide


4 chapters |
				
					
					
						75 lessons
						
					
				
			






Ch 1. 
									
										Contemporary Physicists










Ch 2. 
									
										Early 20th Century Physicists










Ch 3. 
              Late 20th Century Physicists






							Sally Ride | Biography, Education & Quotes
					



							David Bohm | Biography, Quantum Theory & Accomplishments
					



							Hans Bethe | Biography, Career & Discovery
					




Next Lesson
John Bardeen: Biography, Discovery & Inventions




							Dr. Abdul Qadeer Khan | Biography, History & Significance
					

							  










6:36
						 



							Otto Haxel: Biography & Facts
					



							Edward Teller | Biography, Accomplishments & Quotes
					



							John Archibald Wheeler: Biography, Discovery & Books
					



							Luis Alvarez | Biography, Career & Hypothesis
					



							Mohammad Abdus Salam: Biography, Books & Quotes
					



							Thomas Kuhn | Biography, Philosophy & Impact
					







Ch 4. 
									
										Pre-20th Century Physicists












Hans Bethe | Biography, Career & Discovery Related Study Materials




Related Topics






Browse by Courses
General Chemistry for Teachers: Professional Development
Environment & Humanity for Teachers: Professional Development
Physical Geology for Teachers: Professional Development
Principles of Health for Teachers: Professional Development
UExcel Physics: Study Guide & Test Prep
Physical Geology Textbook
Biology 101 Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
Fundamentals of Nursing Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
Middle School Earth Science Curriculum Resource & Lesson Plans
Physical Science Curriculum Resource & Lesson Plans
Earth Science: High School
Holt McDougal Physics: Online Textbook Help
Physical Science for Teachers: Professional Development
Gerontology for Teachers: Professional Development
Natural Sciences for Teachers: Professional Development






Browse by Lessons
Cesium Definition, Facts & Properties
Factors Affecting Energy Flow in Earth's Systems
Nuclear Fuels: Definition, Characteristics & Examples
Macroevolution Overview, Evidences & Examples
Recombinant DNA Definition, Applications & Examples
Alpha Carbon Overview, Acidity & Reactions
Photosynthesis Definition, Process & Equation
Sticky Ends of DNA | Definition, Concept & Examples
Phylogenetic Tree | Definition, Types & Diagram
Introns | Definition, Functions & Sequence
RNA Polymerase II | Overview, Function & Structure
What is Lichen Planus? - Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Crustacean Digestive System
Crustacean Respiratory System
Gamete Intrafallopian Transfer | Definition & Procedure














				Create an account to start this course today
			

						  
							  Used by over 30 million students worldwide
						  
						  
                


				  Create an account
		













Like this lesson



Share




Explore our library of over 88,000 lessons


Search











Browse


						Browse by subject
					


College Courses

Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses



High School Courses

AP
Common Core
GED

High School
See All High School Courses



Other Courses

College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses













Upgrade to enroll
×


Upgrade to Premium to enroll in Significant Physicists Study Guide
Enrolling in a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams.




Track course progress




Take quizzes and exams




Earn certificates of completion



			You will also be able to:
			
Create a Goal
Create custom courses
Get your questions answered




Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!

			Upgrade Now
		
Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!











Download the app




























Plans

Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars® Solutions
Online tutoring



About Us

Blog
Careers
Teach For Us
Press Center
Ambassador
Scholarships





Support

FAQ
Site Feedback



Download the app
























Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community








©  Copyright 2024 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		





Terms of Use  
Privacy Policy  
DMCA Notice  
ADA Compliance  
Honor Code For Students


















×








