

 

Hypatia





Biographies of Women Mathematicians


Home | 
Alphabetical Index | 
Chronological Index | 
Resources | 
Credits | 
Search



Hypatia



370? - 415


Written by Ginny Adair, Class of 1998 (Agnes Scott College)

The life of Hypatia was one enriched with a passion for knowledge.  
Hypatia was the daughter of Theon, who was considered one of the most 
educated men in Alexandria, Egypt. Theon raised Hypatia in a world of 
education. Most 
historians now recognize Hypatia not only as a mathematician and scientist, but also 
as a philosopher.
  
Historians are uncertain of different aspects of Hypatia's life.  For 
example, Hypatia's date of birth is one that is highly debated.  Some historians 
believe that Hypatia was born in the year 370 AD.  On the other hand, others 
 argue that she was an older woman (around 60) at the time of her 
death, thus making her birth in the year 355 AD.
 
Throughout her childhood, Theon raised Hypatia in an environment of 
thought.  Historians believe that Theon tried to raise the perfect human.  Theon 
himself was a well known scholar and a professor of mathematics at the University of 
Alexandria. Theon and Hypatia formed a strong bond as 
he taught Hypatia his own knowledge and shared his passion in the search for 
answers to the unknown.  As Hypatia grew older, she began to develop an 
enthusiasm for mathematics and the sciences (astronomy and astrology). 
 
Most historians believe that Hypatia surpassed her father's 
knowledge at a young age.  However, while Hypatia was still under her father's 
discipline, he also developed for her a physical routine to ensure for her a 
healthy body as well as a highly functional mind. In her education, Theon 
instructed Hypatia on the different religions of the world and taught her how to 
influence people with the power of words. He taught her the fundamentals of 
teaching, so that Hypatia became a profound orator.  People from other cities  
came to study and learn from her.
 
Hypatia's studies included astronomy, astrology, and mathematics.  
References in letters by Synesius, one of Hypatia's
students, credit Hypatia with the invention of the astrolabe, a
device used in studying astronomy. However, other sources date this
instrument back at least a century earlier. Claudius Ptolemy wrote
extensively on the projection used on the plane astrolabe, and
Hypatia's father wrote an astrolabe treatise that was the basis for
much of what was written later in the Middle Ages. Hypatia did teach
about astrolabes as Synesius had an instrument made that was
arguably a form of astrolabe.

Hypatia was known more for 
the work she did in mathematics than in astronomy,
primarily for her work 
on the ideas of conic sections introduced by Apollonius.  She edited the 
work On the Conics of Apollonius, which divided cones into different parts by a 
plane.  This concept developed the ideas of hyperbolas, parabolas, and ellipses.  
With Hypatia's work on this important book, she made the concepts easier to 
understand, thus making the work survive through many centuries.  Hypatia was the first 
woman to have such a profound impact on the survival of early thought in 
mathematics.

Hypatia lived in Alexandria when Christianity started to dominate over the 
other religions.  In the early 390's, riots broke out frequently between the 
different religions.  Cyril, a leader among the Christians, and Orestes,
the civil governor, opposed each other. Hypatia was a friend of
Orestes and it is believed that Cyril spread virulent rumors about her.
In 415 AD, on Hypatia's way home, a mob attacked her, 
stripped her and killed her with pieces of broken pottery.  Later, the mob dragged 
her through the streets.

Hypatia's life ended tragically, however her life's work remained.  Later, 
Descartes, Newton, and Leibniz expanded on her work.  Hypatia made 
extraordinary accomplishments for a woman in her time.  Philosophers 
 considered her a woman of great knowledge and  an excellent 
teacher.

December, 1995
References

Deakin, Michael. "Hypatia and Her Mathematics," The American
Mathematical Monthly, 101, No. 3 (March 1994), 234-243. Available at  Jstor (subscription required).
Deakin, Michael. Hypatia of Alexandria, Mathematician and Martyr, Prometheus Books, Amherst, NY, 2007.
Hypatia of Alexandria, transcript of a talk by Michael Deakin on August 3, 1997,
archived at 
http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/ockhamsrazor/hypatia-of-alexandria/3565116
The 
Primary Sources for the Life and Work of Hypatia of Alexandria by 
Michael Deakin.
Grant, Hardy. "Who's Hypatia? Whose Hypatia Do You Mean?", Math Horizons, Vol 16, No. 4 (01 Apr 2009), 11-15. Mathematical Association of America.
Knorr, Wilbur. "On Hypatia of Alexandria," in Textual Studies in
Ancient and Medieval Geometry, Birkhauser, 1989.
Dzielska, Maria.  Hypatia of Alexandria. Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 1995.
Osen, Lynn M.  Women in Mathematics. United States: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Press, 1974.
Perl, Teri.  Biographies of Women Mathematicians and Related Activities. 
United States: Addison-Wesley, 1978.
Koch, Laura Coffin. "Hypatia," Notable Women in Mathematics: A Biographical Dictionary, Charlene Marrow and Teri Perl, Editors, Greenwood Press, 1998, 94-97
Neugebauer, Otto A., "The Early History of the Astrolabe", from "Astronomy and
History: Selected Essays", Springer-Verlag (1983).
Cupillari, Antonella, A Biography of Maria Gaetana Agnesi, an Eighteenth-Century Woman Mathematician: With Translations of Some of Her Work from Italian into English, Mellen Press, 2008.
Longfellow, Ki. Flow Down Like Silver: Hypatia of Alexandria (a novel), Eio Books, 2009.
Dictionary of Scientific Biography
Biography,
MacTutor History of Mathematics Archives















