








Hypatia the Mathematician




Women and Minorities
in Mathematics
Incorporating Their
Mathematical Achievements Into School Classrooms
 
Hypatia, the First
Known Woman Mathematician
 
Sarah J. Greenwald, 
Appalachian State
University, Boone, North Carolina
and
Edith Prentice
Mendez, 
Sonoma State
University, Rohnert Park, California
 




Hypatia
is the first woman mathematician about whom we have either biographical
knowledge or knowledge of her mathematics.  Hypatia developed commentaries on
older works, probably including those by Ptolemy, Diophantus, and Apollonius,
in order to make them easier to understand.  Hypatia was probably the first
woman to have a profound impact on the survival of early thought in
mathematics.
 
Since Hypatia lived so long
ago, it is hard to know exactly what she worked on, although we do have some
specific historical evidence of her mathematics (Deakin, 1996, pp. 79-81;
Fitzgerald, 1926, p. 90) and an account of her horrible death.  Other fictional
accounts of her life have added to the confusion about her.  We do know that
original scholarship was not Hypatia’s focus.  Together with her father
Theon, she helped preserve some of the treasures of ancient Greek mathematics
and astronomy.  While she cannot compare in originality with the mathematicians
that she wrote commentaries on, her reputation as a teacher and scholar is
secure, and as research and analysis of ancient texts continues, we may indeed
learn more about her mathematical contributions.  
 
We will examine what we do and
do not know about her life, the mathematics that she might have worked on, and
ways to incorporate these ideas into the mathematics classroom.
 
Hypatia’s
Life
 
Hypatia’s birthdate is
unknown.  During the time that she lived, in the 4th century of the common era,
Alexandria was the center of learning for Western civilization.  According to a
6th century report by Damascius (Deakin, 1996) Hypatia was born and educated in
Alexandria.  She went beyond the mathematics and astronomy of her father's
expertise, learning philosophy.  She then taught philosophy, and presumably the
prerequisite mathematics, to students who came from distant places.  She was
held in high esteem for her teaching, her virtue, and her civic-mindedness. 
There is no evidence that she traveled outside of Alexandria.
 
Much of what is published about
Hypatia's life is fiction written in the 19th and 20th centuries.  Hubbard
(1908) wrote an entertaining, but fictional account of Hypatia’s
educational training and life, and even invented a quote that he attributed to
Hypatia.  While this fictional account is highly romantic and may encourage
student interest in Hypatia, there is no evidence supporting most of the tale. 
In her book, Osen (1974) used Hubbard as one of her primary sources on Hypatia.
 Unfortunately, this fictional account has been spread as truth in other
publications that depend on Osen. (e.g., Johnson, 1999; Smith, 1996).
 
This example of mistaking fiction
for fact and the spread of poor scholarship can be a great starting point for a
discussion on the importance of using numerous reputable references, trying to
get as close to original sources as possible, and the fact that books as well
as web pages are not necessarily correct.  Students will be interested in the
idea that a fictional account in one book can propagate as truth, spreading to
many sources.
 
In Hubbard’s book, he
includes a fictionalized sketch of Hypatia.  We have no historical basis for
Hypatia’s appearance.  There are no statues nor sketches of her that have
survived, as far as we know.  In fact, she may have resembled Egyptian women of
the time instead of the woman represented as Hypatia in Figure 1.  Before
showing students this fictionalized sketch of Hypatia, you could ask them to
imagine what Hypatia might have looked like.  The fact that this fictionalized
picture has been stated to be a real picture of Hypatia would also be a good
beginning of a discussion of racial issues.

Figure 1. 
Fictionalized Sketch of Hypatia (Hubbard, 1908).
 
Hypatia's death in 415 is
authenticated by an ancient, nearly contemporary, account of the church
historian Socrates Scholasticus (Valesius, 1680; Deakin, 1996, pp. 82-84). 
Hypatia was an associate of Orestes, the Roman political leader of Alexandria
and a rival of the Christian bishop Cyril for control of the city.  Although
Orestes and some of her students were Christians, Hypatia never converted to
that religion.  A Christian mob was incited to lynch and kill her. The mob
dragged her through the streets and scraped the flesh from her bones with
oyster shells before burning her body.
 
Smith (1996, pp. 45-46) and
Lumpkin & Strong (1995, pp. 145-146) contain worksheets that engage
students with questions related to Hypatia’s life and death.
 
Hypatia’s
Mathematics
 
Hypatia’s reputation as the
leading mathematician and philosopher of her time is authenticated in ancient
writings. We have neither evidence of mathematical advances made by Hypatia,
nor writings that are assuredly hers. Yet there is evidence of her commentaries
on the work of others that have helped to make these older works clearer for
students and to preserve them through the centuries.  Let's look at the ancient
evidence about Hypatia that is available, some conjectures that can be made
about her mathematics, and ways to incorporate these into the classroom.
 
Evidence of Hypatia’s
Commentaries and their Role in the Preservation of Mathematics
 
The one contemporaneous citation
of Hypatia's mathematical work is in the introduction to Theon's commentary on
Ptolemy's Book III of the Almagest.
Theon describes this as "the edition having been prepared by the
philosopher, my daughter Hypatia" (Rome, 1931-1943, p. 807). The other
direct ancient report of Hypatia's mathematics comes from Hesychius in the 6th
century: "She wrote a commentary on Diophantus, the Canon of Astronomy,
and a commentary on the Conics of Apollonius" (Deakin, 1996).   Since this
list does not include the commentary on Ptolemy, it is obviously not
exhaustive.  Wilbur Knorr uses this fact and a close comparison between
Hypatia's edition of the Ptolemy commentary and others by Theon to conjecture
that Hypatia may well have edited and made commentaries on other ancient texts,
including those of Archimedes (Knorr, 1989).  Socrates Scholasticus’s
report of Hypatia’s death also speaks of Hypatia's high achievements in
science and philosophy, surpassing all the other philosophers of her time.  We
also hear of Hypatia's teaching and philosophy from one of her students,
Synesius of Cyrene.  His extant letters do not mention her mathematics, but he
describes Hypatia as "the most holy revered philosopher" and
addresses his letters to her "to the Philosopher" (Fitzgerald, 1926).
 
 
Students will be interested in
the fact that detective work is needed to guess what Hypatia worked on and that
historians are still debating and researching the possibilities today.  They
will also be interested in the role commentaries played in preserving ancient
texts.  These texts were written on fragile papyrus and would have
disintegrated under the best of circumstances.  Centuries of unrest, wars, and
lack of interest in scholarship provided a poor climate for preservation. 
Copies of copies of copies found their way to surviving centers of culture such
as Constantinople and Baghdad.  Arab scholars translated ancient Greek works,
wrote their own commentaries, and produced original mathematics in the Greek
tradition as well.  Some ancient works are known today only because of their
Arabic copies, others have a Greek tradition with later commentaries as well,
or in Latin translation of the Greek.  Commentaries not only provided copies of
ancient texts, but assistance for students who had only the text, not a
teacher, from which to learn.  As Western civilization fragmented and ancient
schools were disbanded, those few who had access to learning were often
solitary scholars.  Thus Hypatia's expertise as a teacher may well have
influenced untold generations.
 
Greek Number System
 
Hypatia must have used the
standard Greek numbering system, which was based on the Greek alphabet, with
some archaic letters included (Heath, 1921, p. 32).  Each decade had a
different symbol [I for tens and K for 20s, for example], but this was not a
positional base-ten system.  There was no use of zero, except in the base-60
fractions used in astronomy. Neither was there a subtractive principle such as
the Roman's use of IV to indicate V - I.  Roman influence helped solidify the
standardization of the order of writing Greek numerals with the higher value on
the left.  In earlier times, 25 might have been written as either KE or EK.
 

Figure 2. 
Greek Number System
 
Hypatia’s Work on
Ptolemy’s Almagest
 
We know that Hypatia worked on
Ptolemy's Book III of the Almagest. 
Hence Hypatia worked in astronomy, a field that relied heavily on careful
calculation and on the geometry required to describe Ptolemy's geocentric
universe.  The Almagest remained
the leading resource for astronomical study in the West and in Arabic regions
from the time of its writing in Alexandria in the second century of the common
era until the time of Copernicus in the 16th century.
 
In Book III of the Almagest, there is a sexigesimal (base 60) computation of the
orbit of the earth around the sun.  Students can look at the Greek version
(Knorr, 1989, pp. 802-804) and then work through a version translated into
English (Knorr, 1989, pp. 780-781).  It is interesting to note that in Book I,
a similar computation was done very differently.  Instead of the precise answer
found in Book III, an approximate solution was found in Book I (see Greenwald,
2001a).  In addition, stylized differences in the writing were also found. 
Hypatia might have worked on this section, but it also might have been Theon or
someone else, and we will never know for certain.
 
Hypatia’s work with
Diophantus
 
Historians have debated the
extent of Hypatia's work with Diophantus.  Diophantus probably lived in the
third century of the common era in Alexandria. He is best known for his work Arithmetica, part of which has survived in Greek, and part only
in Arabic translation. Unlike earlier mathematicians in the Greek tradition who
focused on geometry and number theory, Diophantus wrote on algebra. He made
innovations in introducing symbols to a field that had been one of verbal
algorithms since early Babylonian times. He introduced problems with many
solutions in indeterminate analysis.  Hypatia's ability to teach and write
commentary on these works would be an indication of her versatility as a
mathematician.  Although the subject matter is different from Hypatia’s known
work related to astronomy and the mathematics associated with it, Diophantus
was an Alexandrian mathematician, and Hypatia, as the leading mathematician of
her time, must have known of his work.
 
There are a number of activity
sheets related to Hypatia’s possible commentaries on Diophantus’ Arithmetica.  Perl (1978, p. 27) engages students with the
number of ways to make change for a dollar using nickels, dimes and quarters. 
Johnson (1999, pp. 41-42) asks students to find multiple solutions to an
algebraic statement.  Lumpkin & Strong (1995, pp. 144-146) discuss number
patterns.  Waithe (1987, pp. 176-183) contains a translation of sections from
Diophantus’ Arithmetica
that Hypatia might have worked on.  While this is not an activity sheet,
students can engage the material by translating the problems into modern
algebraic notation.  They can then solve them and present their work to the
rest of the class.
 
Hypatia’s work on
Apollonius’ Conics
 
Apollonius of Perga lived in the
third century before the common era and studied in Alexandria. His work on
conic sections is massive and difficult.  The names of the curves parabola,
ellipse, and hyperbola are his.  Apollonius' work not only influenced Ptolemy
in his studies of planetary orbits, but Descartes and Fermat in the 17th
century in their development of analytical geometry.  Any help that Hypatia
gave to the elucidation and preservation of the works of Apollonius may have
had far reaching consequences.  The use of the Conics in astronomy and Apollonius' connection to
Alexandria are arguments for Hypatia's involvement with commentaries on the Conics.  
 
Students can investigate conic
sections through a worksheet designed to engage them with both geometric and
algebraic formulations of parabolas, hyperbolas and ellipses (see Perl, 1978,
pp. 13-26).  This worksheet encourages visualization through hands on
activities such as cutting and taping sections of a cone and the exploration of
each conic section as a path of points satisfying algebraic conditions.  The
worksheet concludes with real-life applications of conic sections.
 
Hypatia and Archimedes’ Dimension
of the Circle
 
Hypatia may have written a
commentary on Archimedes’ Dimension of the Circle.  Archimedes, the greatest mathematician of ancient
times, was killed by Roman soldiers in 212 before the common era.  He lived in
Syracuse, Sicily, but was in correspondence with mathematicians at Alexandria. 
One of his works, the Method was
lost in the middle ages and only rediscovered in 1906.  Another, the Dimension
of the Circle is found in both Greek and
Arabic copies. The Arabic manuscripts contain further clarification and careful
explanation, such as might be written by a master teacher.  Since Hypatia was
known to be a commentator and an excellent teacher, it is certainly possible
that she was one of the scholars who helped preserve this work.
 
Wilbur Knorr, a math historian,
identified a certain style of writing that he attributes to Hypatia.  He
learned new languages so that he could analyze different versions of
Archimedes’ Dimension of the Circle
in Hebrew, Arabic, Latin and Greek.  Although there is no historical evidence
of the existence of commentaries developed by Hypatia on Archimedes’
work, Knorr suggests that Hypatia's influence can be found there.  As research
and analysis of ancient texts continues, we may learn more about
Hypatia’s mathematical contributions.
 
This diagram shows the inscribed
polygons needed in the proof of Proposition 1: Every circle is equal to a
right-angled triangle, one of whose sides containing the right angle is equal
to the circumference of the circle, and the other such side equals the radius
of the circle.

Figure 3. 
Arabic Diagram for Archimedes Dimension of the Circle.
 
The activity sheet found at the
end of this column engages students with constructions related to
Archimedes’ Dimension of the Circle,
while a worksheet aimed at a higher level (see Greenwald, 2001b) details the
proof of Proposition 1.  Students can also explore these activities in a
dynamic software package.





 
 
References
 
Deakin, M. (1996).   Mathematician
and martyr: A biography of Hypatia of Alexandria. Victoria, Australia:  Department of Mathematics, Monash
University, Clayton.
 
Fitzgerald, A. (1926),  The
Letters of Synesius of Cyrene.  London: 
Oxford University Press.
 
Greenwald, S. (2001a).  Hypatia’s
work on Ptolemy’s Almagest.  [On-line].
 Available:  http://www.mathsci.appstate.edu/~sjg/womeninmath/book3.html
 
Greenwald, S. (2001b).  Classroom
Worksheet on Hypatia’s Possible Work on Archimedes Dimension of the
Circle.  [On-line].  Available: 
http://www.mathsci.appstate.edu/~sjg/wmm/hypatia/Hypatiafinalsheet.html
 
Heath, T. (1921).  A history
of Greek mathematics.  Oxford:  Clarendon.
 
Hubbard, E. (1908).  Little
journeys to the homes of the great teachers.
 East Aurora, NY: the Roycrofters.  Available: 
http://www.polyamory.org/~howard/Hypatia/Hubbard_1928.html
 
Johnson, A. (1999).  Famous
problems and their mathematicians.  Englewood,
CO:  Teacher Ideas Press.
 
Knorr, W. (1989).  Textual
Studies in Ancient and Medieval Geometry. 
Boston, MA:  Birkhauser.
 
Lumpkin, B. & Strong, D.
(1995).  Multicultural science and math connections:  Middle school projects
and activities.  Portland, ME:  J. Weston
Walch.
 
Osen, L. (1974).  Women in
mathematics.  Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press.
 
Perl, T. (1978).  Math equals:
 Biographies of women mathematicians + related activities.  Menlo Park, CA:  Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
 
Rome, A. (1931-1943).  Commentaires
de Pappus et de Theon d'Alexandrie sur
l'Almageste.  Vatican City:  Biblioteca Vaticana.
 
Smith, S. (1996).  Agnesi to
Zeno:  Over 100 vignettes from the history of math.  Berkeley, CA:  Key Curriculum Press.
 
Valesius. (1680).  Ecclesiastical
History of Socrates Scholasticus Cambridge,
England:  John Hayes, Microtext 015 4 981:8.
 
Waithe, M.E. (1987).  A
history of women philosophers: Ancient women philosophers 600 B.C. - 500 A.D.  place, Dordrecht, Netherlands:  Martinus Nijhoff.


Activity Sheet:  Hypatia and Archimedes’ Dimension of the Circle




 
Hypatia
is the first woman mathematician about whom we have either biographical
knowledge or knowledge of her mathematics.  Hypatia developed commentaries on
older works, probably including those by Ptolemy, Diophantus, and Apollonius,
in order to make them easier to understand.  Hypatia was probably the first
woman to have a profound impact on the survival of early thought in mathematics
 
Since Hypatia lived so long ago,
it is hard to know exactly what she worked on, although we do have some
specific historical evidence of her mathematics and an account of her horrible
death.  We know that original scholarship was not Hypatia’s focus. 
Together with her father Theon, she helped preserve some of the treasures of
ancient Greek mathematics and astronomy.  While she cannot compare in
originality with the mathematicians that she wrote commentaries on, her
reputation as a teacher and scholar is secure.
 
Hypatia may have written a
commentary on Archimedes’ Dimension of the Circle.  Wilbur Knorr, a math historian, identified a
certain style of writing that he attributes to Hypatia.  He learned new
languages so that he could analyze different versions of Archimedes’ Dimension
of the Circle in Hebrew, Arabic, Latin and
Greek.  Although there is no direct evidence of the existence of commentaries
developed by Hypatia on Archimedes’ work, Knorr suggests that Hypatia's
influence can be found there.  As research and analysis of ancient texts
continues, we may indeed learn more about Hypatia’s mathematical
contributions.  We will explore mathematical ideas from Archimedes’ Dimension
of the Circle and in this way we will see
some mathematics that Hypatia might have worked on.
 
Archimedes worked to establish a very good estimate of
the value of the ratio of circumference to diameter that we today call
“π”, and he proved the following theorem: The area of any
circle is equal to the area of a right-angled triangle in which one of the
sides about the right angle is equal to the radius and the other to the
circumference of the circle. 
 
1.  Archimedes’ theorem
states that for any circle, one-half the perimeter times the radius is equal to
the area.  Using formulas for the area and perimeter (circumference) of a
circle, in terms of the radius, show that this statement is true.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since Archimedes and the
mathematicians who later wrote commentaries on his work, such as possibly
Hypatia, were not working with the formulas that we use today, they were
interested in proving this statement.  Archimedes proved the theorem by
inscribing and circumscribing polygons about a circle.  Here are some of the
constructions related to his clever proof.
 
2.  Construct and find the area
of the square inscribed in a circle of diameter 6 inches as shown below. 
Archimedes knew the Pythagorean Theorem and several useful facts about circles
and squares that you already know.  State any facts that you use.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  If we bisect the arcs formed
by the inscribed square, then we will obtain four new points.  We can connect
these points and the corners of the square with straight lines in order to
obtain the octagon in the picture below.  Find the area of the inscribed
regular octagon.  Give your answer both in exact radical notation and
approximated to 4 decimal places.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  Find the area of the square
circumscribed about the same circle we started with in question 2.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.  What bounds have you now
found for π?  You should approximate your results to four decimal places.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.  Calculate the area of the
your circle with diameter 6 inches, using 3.1416 as the approximation of
π. Compare this value to the approximations in questions 2-4.



