



Isaac Newton - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file



















Search











Search





























Create account

Log in








Personal tools





 Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Early life




Toggle Early life subsection





1.1
The King's School








1.2
University of Cambridge










2
Mid-life




Toggle Mid-life subsection





2.1
Calculus








2.2
Optics








2.3
Gravity










3
Later life




Toggle Later life subsection





3.1
Royal Mint








3.2
Knighthood








3.3
Death










4
Personality








5
Theology




Toggle Theology subsection





5.1
Religious views








5.2
Religious thought










6
Alchemy








7
Legacy




Toggle Legacy subsection





7.1
Fame








7.2
Apple incident








7.3
Commemorations










8
The Enlightenment








9
Works




Toggle Works subsection





9.1
Published in his lifetime








9.2
Published posthumously










10
See also








11
References




Toggle References subsection





11.1
Notes








11.2
Citations








11.3
Bibliography










12
Further reading




Toggle Further reading subsection





12.1
Primary








12.2
Alchemy








12.3
Religion








12.4
Science










13
External links




Toggle External links subsection





13.1
Writings by Newton




















Toggle the table of contents







Isaac Newton



227 languages




АдыгабзэAfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛअंगिकाÆngliscالعربيةAragonésܐܪܡܝܐArmãneashtiArpetanঅসমীয়াAsturianuअवधीAvañe'ẽAymar aruAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهBasa Baliবাংলা閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gúBasa BanyumasanБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीBikol CentralБългарскиBoarischBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаCebuanoČeštinaChavacano de ZamboangaChi-ChewaChiShonaCorsuCymraegDanskالدارجةDeutschދިވެހިބަސްDolnoserbskiडोटेलीEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskFurlanGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalego贛語Gĩkũyũગુજરાતીगोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî한국어HausaHawaiʻiՀայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiIdoIlokanoবিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরীBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaInterlingueИронÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKabɩyɛKalaallisutಕನ್ನಡKapampanganქართულიҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliКомиKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîКыргызчаLadinoLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschЛезгиLietuviųLigureLimburgsLingua Franca NovaLivvinkarjalaLa .lojban.LugandaLombardMagyarमैथिलीМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیBahasa MelayuMinangkabau閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄MirandésМокшеньМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlNederlandsNedersaksiesनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNordfriiskNorfuk / PitkernNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNovialOccitanОлык марийଓଡ଼ିଆOromooOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀPangasinanپنجابیပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏPapiamentuپښتوPatoisភាសាខ្មែរPicardPiemontèisPlattdüütschPolskiΠοντιακάPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaQırımtatarcaRipoarischRomânăRumantschRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаSakizayaसंस्कृतम्ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤسرائیکیSarduScotsSeelterskShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСловѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟŚlůnskiSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaclḥitTaqbaylitTarandíneТатарча / tatarçaతెలుగుไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeTürkmençeТыва дылУкраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtVolapükVõroWalon文言West-VlamsWinaray吴语ייִדישYorùbá粵語ZazakiZeêuwsŽemaitėška中文BetawiTolışi

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadView sourceView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadView sourceView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource




























From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


English mathematician and physicist (1642–1727)
For other uses, see Isaac Newton (disambiguation).


SirIsaac NewtonFRSPortrait of Newton at 46, 1689Born(1643-01-04)4 January 1643 [O.S. 25 December 1642][a]Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, Lincolnshire, EnglandDied31 March 1727(1727-03-31) (aged 84) [O.S. 20 March 1726][a]Kensington, Middlesex, Great BritainResting placeWestminster AbbeyEducationTrinity College, Cambridge (B.A., 1665; M.A., 1668)[5]Known for
List
Newtonian mechanics universal gravitation calculus Newton's laws of motion optics binomial series Principia Newton's method  Newton's law of cooling Newton's identities Newton's metal Newton line Newton–Gauss line Newtonian fluid Newton's ringsStanding on the shoulders of giants List of all other works and concepts
AwardsFRS (1672)[1]Knight Bachelor (1705)Scientific careerFieldsPhysicsnatural philosophyalchemytheologymathematicsastronomyeconomicsInstitutionsUniversity of CambridgeRoyal SocietyRoyal MintAcademic advisorsIsaac Barrow[2]Benjamin Pulleyn[3][4]Notable studentsRoger CotesWilliam Whiston
Member of Parliamentfor the University of CambridgeIn office1689–1690Preceded byRobert BradySucceeded byEdward FinchIn office1701–1702Preceded byAnthony HammondSucceeded byArthur Annesley, 5th Earl of Anglesey12th President of the Royal SocietyIn office1703–1727Preceded byJohn SomersSucceeded byHans SloaneMaster of the MintIn office1699–17271696–1699Warden of the MintPreceded byThomas NealeSucceeded byJohn Conduitt2nd Lucasian Professor of MathematicsIn office1669–1702Preceded byIsaac BarrowSucceeded byWilliam Whiston
Personal detailsPolitical partyWhig
Signature
Sir Isaac Newton FRS (25 December 1642 – 20 March 1726/27[a]) was an English polymath active as a mathematician, physicist, astronomer, alchemist, theologian, and author who was described in his time as a natural philosopher.[7] He was a key figure in the Scientific Revolution and the Enlightenment that followed. His pioneering book Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica (Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy), first published in 1687, consolidated many previous results and established classical mechanics.[8][9] Newton also made seminal contributions to optics, and shares credit with German mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz for developing infinitesimal calculus, though he developed calculus years before Leibniz.[10][11]
In the Principia, Newton formulated the laws of motion and universal gravitation that formed the dominant scientific viewpoint for centuries until it was superseded by the theory of relativity. Newton used his mathematical description of gravity to derive Kepler's laws of planetary motion, account for tides, the trajectories of comets, the precession of the equinoxes and other phenomena, eradicating doubt about the Solar System's heliocentricity.[12] He demonstrated that the motion of objects on Earth and celestial bodies could be accounted for by the same principles. Newton's inference that the Earth is an oblate spheroid was later confirmed by the geodetic measurements of Maupertuis, La Condamine, and others, convincing most European scientists of the superiority of Newtonian mechanics over earlier systems.
Newton built the first practical reflecting telescope and developed a sophisticated theory of colour based on the observation that a prism separates white light into the colours of the visible spectrum. His work on light was collected in his highly influential book Opticks, published in 1704. He also formulated an empirical law of cooling, made the first theoretical calculation of the speed of sound, and introduced the notion of a Newtonian fluid. In addition to his work on calculus, as a mathematician Newton contributed to the study of power series, generalised the binomial theorem to non-integer exponents, developed a method for approximating the roots of a function, and classified most of the cubic plane curves.
Newton was a fellow of Trinity College and the second Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge. He was a devout but unorthodox Christian who privately rejected the doctrine of the Trinity. He refused to take holy orders in the Church of England, unlike most members of the Cambridge faculty of the day. Beyond his work on the mathematical sciences, Newton dedicated much of his time to the study of alchemy and biblical chronology, but most of his work in those areas remained unpublished until long after his death. Politically and personally tied to the Whig party, Newton served two brief terms as Member of Parliament for the University of Cambridge, in 1689–1690 and 1701–1702. He was knighted by Queen Anne in 1705 and spent the last three decades of his life in London, serving as Warden (1696–1699) and Master (1699–1727) of the Royal Mint, as well as president of the Royal Society (1703–1727).


Early life
Main article: Early life of Isaac Newton
Isaac Newton was born (according to the Julian calendar in use in England at the time) on Christmas Day, 25 December 1642 (NS 4 January 1643[a]) at Woolsthorpe Manor in Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, a hamlet in the county of Lincolnshire.[13] His father, also named Isaac Newton, had died three months before. Born prematurely, Newton was a small child; his mother Hannah Ayscough reportedly said that he could have fit inside a quart mug.[14] When Newton was three, his mother remarried and went to live with her new husband, the Reverend Barnabas Smith, leaving her son in the care of his maternal grandmother, Margery Ayscough (née Blythe). Newton disliked his stepfather and maintained some enmity towards his mother for marrying him, as revealed by this entry in a list of sins committed up to the age of 19: "Threatening my father and mother Smith to burn them and the house over them."[15] Newton's mother had three children (Mary, Benjamin, and Hannah) from her second marriage.[16]

The King's School
From the age of about twelve until he was seventeen, Newton was educated at The King's School in Grantham, which taught Latin and Ancient Greek and probably imparted a significant foundation of mathematics.[17] He was removed from school by his mother and returned to Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth by October 1659. His mother, widowed for the second time, attempted to make him a farmer, an occupation he hated.[18] Henry Stokes, master at The King's School, persuaded his mother to send him back to school. Motivated partly by a desire for revenge against a schoolyard bully, he became the top-ranked student,[19] distinguishing himself mainly by building sundials and models of windmills.[20]

University of Cambridge
In June 1661, Newton was admitted to Trinity College at the University of Cambridge. His uncle Reverend William Ayscough, who had studied at Cambridge, recommended him to the university. At Cambridge, Newton started as a subsizar, paying his way by performing valet duties until he was awarded a scholarship in 1664, which covered his university costs for four more years until the completion of his MA.[21] At the time, Cambridge's teachings were based on those of Aristotle, whom Newton read along with then more modern philosophers, including Descartes and astronomers such as Galileo Galilei and Thomas Street. He set down in his notebook a series of "Quaestiones" about mechanical philosophy as he found it. In 1665, he discovered the generalised binomial theorem and began to develop a mathematical theory that later became calculus. Soon after Newton obtained his BA degree at Cambridge in August 1665, the university temporarily closed as a precaution against the Great Plague.[22]
Although he had been undistinguished as a Cambridge student,[23] Newton's private studies at his home in Woolsthorpe over the next two years saw the development of his theories on calculus,[24] optics, and the law of gravitation.[25][26]
In April 1667, Newton returned to the University of Cambridge, and in October he was elected as a fellow of Trinity.[27][28] Fellows were required to take holy orders and be ordained as Anglican priests, although this was not enforced in the Restoration years, and an assertion of conformity to the Church of England was sufficient. He made the commitment that "I will either set Theology as the object of my studies and will take holy orders when the time prescribed by these statutes [7 years] arrives, or I will resign from the college."[29] Up until this point he had not thought much about religion and had twice signed his agreement to the Thirty-nine Articles, the basis of Church of England doctrine. By 1675 the issue could not be avoided, and by then his unconventional views stood in the way.[30]
His academic work impressed the Lucasian professor Isaac Barrow, who was anxious to develop his own religious and administrative potential (he became master of Trinity College two years later); in 1669, Newton succeeded him, only one year after receiving his MA. The terms of the Lucasian professorship required that the holder not be active in the church – presumably[weasel words] to leave more time for science. Newton argued that this should exempt him from the ordination requirement, and King Charles II, whose permission was needed, accepted this argument; thus, a conflict between Newton's religious views and Anglican orthodoxy was averted.[31]
Newton was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1672.[1]

Mid-life
Calculus
Newton's work has been said "to distinctly advance every branch of mathematics then studied".[32] His work on the subject, usually referred to as fluxions or calculus, seen in a manuscript of October 1666, is now published among Newton's mathematical papers.[33] His work De analysi per aequationes numero terminorum infinitas, sent by Isaac Barrow to John Collins in June 1669, was identified by Barrow in a letter sent to Collins that August as the work "of an extraordinary genius and proficiency in these things".[34] Newton later became involved in a dispute with Leibniz over priority in the development of calculus. Most modern historians believe that Newton and Leibniz developed calculus independently, although with very different mathematical notations. However, it is established that Newton came to develop calculus much earlier than Leibniz.[10][11][35] Leibniz's notation and "differential Method", nowadays recognised as much more convenient notations, were adopted by continental European mathematicians, and after 1820 or so, also by British mathematicians.[citation needed]
His work extensively uses calculus in geometric form based on limiting values of the ratios of vanishingly small quantities: in the Principia itself, Newton gave demonstration of this under the name of "the method of first and last ratios"[36] and explained why he put his expositions in this form,[37] remarking also that "hereby the same thing is performed as by the method of indivisibles."[38] Because of this, the Principia has been called "a book dense with the theory and application of the infinitesimal calculus" in modern times[39] and in Newton's time "nearly all of it is of this calculus."[40] His use of methods involving "one or more orders of the infinitesimally small" is present in his De motu corporum in gyrum of 1684[41] and in his papers on motion "during the two decades preceding 1684".[42]

Newton in 1702 by Godfrey Kneller
Newton had been reluctant to publish his calculus because he feared controversy and criticism.[43] He was close to the Swiss mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier. In 1691, Duillier started to write a new version of Newton's Principia, and corresponded with Leibniz.[44] In 1693, the relationship between Duillier and Newton deteriorated and the book was never completed.[45] Starting in 1699, other members[who?] of the Royal Society accused Leibniz of plagiarism.[46] The dispute then broke out in full force in 1711 when the Royal Society proclaimed in a study that it was Newton who was the true discoverer and labelled Leibniz a fraud; it was later found that Newton wrote the study's concluding remarks on Leibniz. Thus began the bitter controversy which marred the lives of both Newton and Leibniz until the latter's death in 1716.[47]
Newton is generally credited with the generalised binomial theorem, valid for any exponent. He discovered Newton's identities, Newton's method, classified cubic plane curves (polynomials of degree three in two variables), made substantial contributions to the theory of finite differences, and was the first to use fractional indices and to employ coordinate geometry to derive solutions to Diophantine equations. He approximated partial sums of the harmonic series by logarithms (a precursor to Euler's summation formula) and was the first to use power series with confidence and to revert power series. Newton's work on infinite series was inspired by Simon Stevin's decimals.[48]

Optics
A replica of the reflecting telescope Newton presented to the Royal Society in 1672 (the first one he made in 1668 was loaned to an instrument maker but there is no further record of what happened to it).[49]
In 1666, Newton observed that the spectrum of colours exiting a prism in the position of minimum deviation is oblong, even when the light ray entering the prism is circular, which is to say, the prism refracts different colours by different angles.[50][51] This led him to conclude that colour is a property intrinsic to light – a point which had, until then, been a matter of debate.
From 1670 to 1672, Newton lectured on optics.[52] During this period he investigated the refraction of light, demonstrating that the multicoloured image produced by a prism, which he named a spectrum, could be recomposed into white light by a lens and a second prism.[53] Modern scholarship has revealed that Newton's analysis and resynthesis of white light owes a debt to corpuscular alchemy.[54]
He showed that coloured light does not change its properties by separating out a coloured beam and shining it on various objects, and that regardless of whether reflected, scattered, or transmitted, the light remains the same colour. Thus, he observed that colour is the result of objects interacting with already-coloured light rather than objects generating the colour themselves. This is known as Newton's theory of colour.[55]

Illustration of a dispersive prism separating white light into the colours of the spectrum, as discovered by Newton
From this work, he concluded that the lens of any refracting telescope would suffer from the dispersion of light into colours (chromatic aberration). As a proof of the concept, he constructed a telescope using reflective mirrors instead of lenses as the objective to bypass that problem.[56][57] Building the design, the first known functional reflecting telescope, today known as a Newtonian telescope,[57] involved solving the problem of a suitable mirror material and shaping technique. Newton ground his own mirrors out of a custom composition of highly reflective speculum metal, using Newton's rings to judge the quality of the optics for his telescopes. In late 1668,[58] he was able to produce this first reflecting telescope. It was about eight inches long and it gave a clearer and larger image. In 1671, the Royal Society asked for a demonstration of his reflecting telescope.[59] Their interest encouraged him to publish his notes, Of Colours,[60] which he later expanded into the work Opticks. When Robert Hooke criticised some of Newton's ideas, Newton was so offended that he withdrew from public debate. Newton and Hooke had brief exchanges in 1679–80, when Hooke, appointed to manage the Royal Society's correspondence, opened up a correspondence intended to elicit contributions from Newton to Royal Society transactions,[61] which had the effect of stimulating Newton to work out a proof that the elliptical form of planetary orbits would result from a centripetal force inversely proportional to the square of the radius vector. But the two men remained generally on poor terms until Hooke's death.[62]

Facsimile of a 1682 letter from Newton to William Briggs, commenting on Briggs' A New Theory of Vision
Newton argued that light is composed of particles or corpuscles, which were refracted by accelerating into a denser medium. He verged on soundlike waves to explain the repeated pattern of reflection and transmission by thin films (Opticks Bk. II, Props. 12), but still retained his theory of 'fits' that disposed corpuscles to be reflected or transmitted (Props.13). However, later physicists favoured a purely wavelike explanation of light to account for the interference patterns and the general phenomenon of diffraction. Today's quantum mechanics, photons, and the idea of wave–particle duality bear only a minor resemblance to Newton's understanding of light.
In his Hypothesis of Light of 1675, Newton posited the existence of the ether to transmit forces between particles. The contact with the Cambridge Platonist philosopher Henry More revived his interest in alchemy.[63] He replaced the ether with occult forces based on Hermetic ideas of attraction and repulsion between particles. John Maynard Keynes, who acquired many of Newton's writings on alchemy, stated that "Newton was not the first of the age of reason: He was the last of the magicians."[64] Newton's contributions to science cannot be isolated from his interest in alchemy.[63] This was at a time when there was no clear distinction between alchemy and science.[citation needed]
In 1704, Newton published Opticks, in which he expounded his corpuscular theory of light. He considered light to be made up of extremely subtle corpuscles, that ordinary matter was made of grosser corpuscles and speculated that through a kind of alchemical transmutation "Are not gross Bodies and Light convertible into one another, ... and may not Bodies receive much of their Activity from the Particles of Light which enter their Composition?"[65] Newton also constructed a primitive form of a frictional electrostatic generator, using a glass globe.[66]
In his book Opticks, Newton was the first to show a diagram using a prism as a beam expander, and also the use of multiple-prism arrays.[67] Some 278 years after Newton's discussion, multiple-prism beam expanders became central to the development of narrow-linewidth tunable lasers. Also, the use of these prismatic beam expanders led to the multiple-prism dispersion theory.[67]
Subsequent to Newton, much has been amended. Young and Fresnel discarded Newton's particle theory in favour of Huygens' wave theory to show that colour is the visible manifestation of light's wavelength. Science also slowly came to realise the difference between perception of colour and mathematisable optics. The German poet and scientist, Goethe, could not shake the Newtonian foundation but "one hole Goethe did find in Newton's armour, ... Newton had committed himself to the doctrine that refraction without colour was impossible. He, therefore, thought that the object-glasses of telescopes must forever remain imperfect, achromatism and refraction being incompatible. This inference was proved by Dollond to be wrong."[68]

Engraving of Portrait of Newton by John Vanderbank
Gravity
Newton's own copy of Principia with Newton's hand-written corrections for the second edition, now housed in the Wren Library at Trinity College, Cambridge
Newton had been developing his theory of gravitation as far back as 1665.[25][26] In 1679, Newton returned to his work on celestial mechanics by considering gravitation and its effect on the orbits of planets with reference to Kepler's laws of planetary motion. This followed stimulation by a brief exchange of letters in 1679–80 with Hooke, who had been appointed Secretary of the Royal Society,[69]  and who opened a correspondence intended to elicit contributions from Newton to Royal Society transactions.[61] Newton's reawakening interest in astronomical matters received further stimulus by the appearance of a comet in the winter of 1680–1681, on which he corresponded with John Flamsteed.[70] After the exchanges with Hooke, Newton worked out a proof that the elliptical form of planetary orbits would result from a centripetal force inversely proportional to the square of the radius vector. Newton communicated his results to Edmond Halley and to the Royal Society in De motu corporum in gyrum, a tract written on about nine sheets which was copied into the Royal Society's Register Book in December 1684.[71] This tract contained the nucleus that Newton developed and expanded to form the Principia.
The Principia was published on 5 July 1687 with encouragement and financial help from Halley. In this work, Newton stated the three universal laws of motion. Together, these laws describe the relationship between any object, the forces acting upon it and the resulting motion, laying the foundation for classical mechanics. They contributed to many advances during the Industrial Revolution which soon followed and were not improved upon for more than 200 years. Many of these advances continue to be the underpinnings of non-relativistic technologies in the modern world. He used the Latin word gravitas (weight) for the effect that would become known as gravity, and defined the law of universal gravitation.[72]
In the same work, Newton presented a calculus-like method of geometrical analysis using 'first and last ratios', gave the first analytical determination (based on Boyle's law) of the speed of sound in air, inferred the oblateness of Earth's spheroidal figure, accounted for the precession of the equinoxes as a result of the Moon's gravitational attraction on the Earth's oblateness, initiated the gravitational study of the irregularities in the motion of the Moon, provided a theory for the determination of the orbits of comets, and much more.[72] Newton's biographer David Brewster reported that the complexity of applying his theory of gravity to the motion of the moon was so great it affected Newton's health: "[H]e was deprived of his appetite and sleep" during his work on the problem in 1692–93, and told the astronomer John Machin that "his head never ached but when he was studying the subject". According to Brewster, Edmund Halley also told John Conduitt that when pressed to complete his analysis Newton "always replied that it made his head ache, and kept him awake so often, that he would think of it no more". [Emphasis in original][73]
Newton made clear his heliocentric view of the Solar System—developed in a somewhat modern way because already in the mid-1680s he recognised the "deviation of the Sun" from the centre of gravity of the Solar System.[74] For Newton, it was not precisely the centre of the Sun or any other body that could be considered at rest, but rather "the common centre of gravity of the Earth, the Sun and all the Planets is to be esteem'd the Centre of the World", and this centre of gravity "either is at rest or moves uniformly forward in a right line". (Newton adopted the "at rest" alternative in view of common consent that the centre, wherever it was, was at rest.)[75]
Newton was criticised for introducing "occult agencies" into science because of his postulate of an invisible force able to act over vast distances.[76] Later, in the second edition of the Principia (1713), Newton firmly rejected such criticisms in a concluding General Scholium, writing that it was enough that the phenomena implied a gravitational attraction, as they did; but they did not so far indicate its cause, and it was both unnecessary and improper to frame hypotheses of things that were not implied by the phenomena. (Here Newton used what became his famous expression "Hypotheses non fingo".[77])
With the Principia, Newton became internationally recognised.[78] He acquired a circle of admirers, including the Swiss-born mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier.[79]
In 1710, Newton found 72 of the 78 "species" of cubic curves and categorised them into four types.[80] In 1717, and probably with Newton's help, James Stirling proved that every cubic was one of these four types. Newton also claimed that the four types could be obtained by plane projection from one of them, and this was proved in 1731, four years after his death.[81]

Later life
Further information: Later life of Isaac Newton
Royal Mint
Isaac Newton in old age in 1712, portrait by Sir James Thornhill
In the 1690s, Newton wrote a number of religious tracts dealing with the literal and symbolic interpretation of the Bible. A manuscript Newton sent to John Locke in which he disputed the fidelity of 1 John 5:7—the Johannine Comma—and its fidelity to the original manuscripts of the New Testament, remained unpublished until 1785.[82]
Newton was also a member of the Parliament of England for Cambridge University in 1689 and 1701, but according to some accounts his only comments were to complain about a cold draught in the chamber and request that the window be closed.[83] He was, however, noted by Cambridge diarist Abraham de la Pryme to have rebuked students who were frightening locals by claiming that a house was haunted.[84]
Newton moved to London to take up the post of warden of the Royal Mint during the reign of King William III in 1696, a position that he had obtained through the patronage of Charles Montagu, 1st Earl of Halifax, then Chancellor of the Exchequer. He took charge of England's great recoining, trod on the toes of Lord Lucas, Governor of the Tower, and secured the job of deputy comptroller of the temporary Chester branch for Edmond Halley. Newton became perhaps the best-known Master of the Mint upon the death of Thomas Neale in 1699, a position Newton held for the last 30 years of his life.[85][86] These appointments were intended as sinecures, but Newton took them seriously. He retired from his Cambridge duties in 1701, and exercised his authority to reform the currency and punish clippers and counterfeiters.
As Warden, and afterwards as Master, of the Royal Mint, Newton estimated that 20 percent of the coins taken in during the Great Recoinage of 1696 were counterfeit. Counterfeiting was high treason, punishable by the felon being hanged, drawn and quartered. Despite this, convicting even the most flagrant criminals could be extremely difficult, but Newton proved equal to the task.[87]
Disguised as a habitué of bars and taverns, he gathered much of that evidence himself.[88] For all the barriers placed to prosecution, and separating the branches of government, English law still had ancient and formidable customs of authority. Newton had himself made a justice of the peace in all the home counties. A draft letter regarding the matter is included in Newton's personal first edition of Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica, which he must have been amending at the time.[89] Then he conducted more than 100 cross-examinations of witnesses, informers, and suspects between June 1698 and Christmas 1699. Newton successfully prosecuted 28 coiners.[90]

Coat of arms of the Newton family of Great Gonerby, Lincolnshire, afterwards used by Sir Isaac[91]
Newton was made president of the Royal Society in 1703 and an associate of the French Académie des Sciences. In his position at the Royal Society, Newton made an enemy of John Flamsteed, the Astronomer Royal, by prematurely publishing Flamsteed's Historia Coelestis Britannica, which Newton had used in his studies.[92]

Knighthood
In April 1705, Queen Anne knighted Newton during a royal visit to Trinity College, Cambridge. The knighthood is likely to have been motivated by political considerations connected with the parliamentary election in May 1705, rather than any recognition of Newton's scientific work or services as Master of the Mint.[93] Newton was the second scientist to be knighted, after Francis Bacon.[94]
As a result of a report written by Newton on 21 September 1717 to the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, the bimetallic relationship between gold coins and silver coins was changed by royal proclamation on 22 December 1717, forbidding the exchange of gold guineas for more than 21 silver shillings.[95] This inadvertently resulted in a silver shortage as silver coins were used to pay for imports, while exports were paid for in gold, effectively moving Britain from the silver standard to its first gold standard. It is a matter of debate as to whether he intended to do this or not.[96] It has been argued that Newton conceived of his work at the Mint as a continuation of his alchemical work.[97]
Newton was invested in the South Sea Company and lost some £20,000 (£4.4 million in 2020[98]) when it collapsed in around 1720.[99]
Toward the end of his life, Newton took up residence at Cranbury Park, near Winchester, with his niece and her husband, until his death.[100] His half-niece, Catherine Barton,[101] served as his hostess in social affairs at his house on Jermyn Street in London; he was her "very loving Uncle",[102] according to his letter to her when she was recovering from smallpox.

Death
Death mask of Newton, photographed c. 1906
Newton died in his sleep in London on 20 March 1727 (OS 20 March 1726; NS 31 March 1727).[a] He was given a ceremonial funeral, attended by nobles, scientists, and philosophers, and was buried in Westminster Abbey among kings and queens. He was the first scientist to be buried in the abbey.[103] Voltaire may have been present at his funeral.[104] A bachelor, he had divested much of his estate to relatives during his last years, and died intestate.[105] His papers went to John Conduitt and Catherine Barton.[106]
Shortly after his death, a plaster death mask was moulded of Newton. It was used by Flemish sculptor John Michael Rysbrack in making a sculpture of Newton.[107] It is now held by the Royal Society,[108] who created a 3D scan of it in 2012.[109][110]
Newton's hair was posthumously examined and found to contain mercury, probably resulting from his alchemical pursuits. Mercury poisoning could explain Newton's eccentricity in late life.[105]

Personality
Although it was claimed that he was once engaged,[b] Newton never married. The French writer and philosopher Voltaire, who was in London at the time of Newton's funeral, said that he "was never sensible to any passion, was not subject to the common frailties of mankind, nor had any commerce with women—a circumstance which was assured me by the physician and surgeon who attended him in his last moments.”[112] There exists a widespread belief that Newton died a virgin, and writers as diverse as mathematician Charles Hutton,[113] economist John Maynard Keynes,[114] and physicist Carl Sagan have commented on it.[115]
Newton had a close friendship with the Swiss mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier, whom he met in London around 1689[79]—some of their correspondence has survived.[116][117] Their relationship came to an abrupt and unexplained end in 1693, and at the same time Newton suffered a nervous breakdown,[118] which included sending wild accusatory letters to his friends Samuel Pepys and John Locke. His note to the latter included the charge that Locke had endeavoured to "embroil" him with "woemen & by other means".[119]
Newton was relatively modest about his achievements, writing in a letter to Robert Hooke in February 1676, "If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants."[120] Two writers think that the sentence, written at a time when Newton and Hooke were in dispute over optical discoveries, was an oblique attack on Hooke (said to have been short and hunchbacked), rather than—or in addition to—a statement of modesty.[121][122] On the other hand, the widely known proverb about standing on the shoulders of giants, published among others by seventeenth-century poet George Herbert (a former orator of the University of Cambridge and fellow of Trinity College) in his Jacula Prudentum (1651), had as its main point that "a dwarf on a giant's shoulders sees farther of the two", and so its effect as an analogy would place Newton himself rather than Hooke as the 'dwarf'.
In a later memoir, Newton wrote, "I do not know what I may appear to the world, but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the sea-shore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me."[123]

Theology
Religious views
Main articles: Religious views of Isaac Newton and Isaac Newton's occult studies
Although born into an Anglican family, by his thirties Newton held a Christian faith that, had it been made public, would not have been considered orthodox by mainstream Christianity,[124] with one historian labelling him a heretic.[125]
By 1672, he had started to record his theological researches in notebooks which he showed to no one and which have only been available for public examination since 1972.[126] Over half of what Newton wrote concerned theology and alchemy, and most has never been printed.[126] His writings demonstrate an extensive knowledge of early Church writings and show that in the conflict between Athanasius and Arius which defined the Creed, he took the side of Arius, the loser, who rejected the conventional view of the Trinity. Newton "recognized Christ as a divine mediator between God and man, who was subordinate to the Father who created him."[127] He was especially interested in prophecy, but for him, "the great apostasy was trinitarianism."[128]
Newton tried unsuccessfully to obtain one of the two fellowships that exempted the holder from the ordination requirement. At the last moment in 1675 he received a dispensation from the government that excused him and all future holders of the Lucasian chair.[129]
In Newton's eyes, worshipping Christ as God was idolatry, to him the fundamental sin.[130] In 1999, historian Stephen D. Snobelen wrote, "Isaac Newton was a heretic. But ... he never made a public declaration of his private faith—which the orthodox would have deemed extremely radical. He hid his faith so well that scholars are still unraveling his personal beliefs."[125] Snobelen concludes that Newton was at least a Socinian sympathiser (he owned and had thoroughly read at least eight Socinian books), possibly an Arian and almost certainly an anti-trinitarian.[125]

Newton (1795, detail) by William Blake. Newton is depicted critically as a "divine geometer".[131]
Although the laws of motion and universal gravitation became Newton's best-known discoveries, he warned against using them to view the Universe as a mere machine, as if akin to a great clock. He said, "So then gravity may put the planets into motion, but without the Divine Power it could never put them into such a circulating motion, as they have about the sun".[132]
Along with his scientific fame, Newton's studies of the Bible and of the early Church Fathers were also noteworthy. Newton wrote works on textual criticism, most notably An Historical Account of Two Notable Corruptions of Scripture and Observations upon the Prophecies of Daniel, and the Apocalypse of St. John.[133] He placed the crucifixion of Jesus Christ at 3 April, AD 33, which agrees with one traditionally accepted date.[134]
He believed in a rationally immanent world, but he rejected the hylozoism implicit in Leibniz and Baruch Spinoza. The ordered and dynamically informed Universe could be understood, and must be understood, by an active reason. In his correspondence, Newton claimed that in writing the Principia "I had an eye upon such Principles as might work with considering men for the belief of a Deity".[135] He saw evidence of design in the system of the world: "Such a wonderful uniformity in the planetary system must be allowed the effect of choice". But Newton insisted that divine intervention would eventually be required to reform the system, due to the slow growth of instabilities.[136] For this, Leibniz lampooned him: "God Almighty wants to wind up his watch from time to time: otherwise it would cease to move. He had not, it seems, sufficient foresight to make it a perpetual motion."[137]
Newton's position was vigorously defended by his follower Samuel Clarke in a famous correspondence. A century later, Pierre-Simon Laplace's work Celestial Mechanics had a natural explanation for why the planet orbits do not require periodic divine intervention.[138] The contrast between Laplace's mechanistic worldview and Newton's one is the most strident considering the famous answer which the French scientist gave Napoleon, who had criticised him for the absence of the Creator in the Mécanique céleste: "Sire, j'ai pu me passer de cette hypothèse" ("Sir, I didn't need this hypothesis").[139]
Scholars long debated whether Newton disputed the doctrine of the Trinity. His first biographer, David Brewster, who compiled his manuscripts, interpreted Newton as questioning the veracity of some passages used to support the Trinity, but never denying the doctrine of the Trinity as such.[140] In the twentieth century, encrypted manuscripts written by Newton and bought by John Maynard Keynes (among others) were deciphered[64] and it became known that Newton did indeed reject Trinitarianism.[125]

Religious thought
Newton and Robert Boyle's approach to the mechanical philosophy was promoted by rationalist pamphleteers as a viable alternative to the pantheists and enthusiasts, and was accepted hesitantly by orthodox preachers as well as dissident preachers like the latitudinarians.[141] The clarity and simplicity of science was seen as a way to combat the emotional and metaphysical superlatives of both superstitious enthusiasm and the threat of atheism,[142] and at the same time, the second wave of English deists used Newton's discoveries to demonstrate the possibility of a "Natural Religion".
The attacks made against pre-Enlightenment "magical thinking", and the mystical elements of Christianity, were given their foundation with Boyle's mechanical conception of the universe. Newton gave Boyle's ideas their completion through mathematical proofs and, perhaps more importantly, was very successful in popularising them.[143]

Alchemy


Newton was not the first of the age of reason. He was the last of the magicians, the last of the Babylonians and Sumerians, the last great mind which looked out on the visible and intellectual world with the same eyes as those who began to build our intellectual inheritance rather less than 10,000 years ago. Isaac Newton, a posthumous child born with no father on Christmas Day, 1642, was the last wonderchild to whom the Magi could do sincere and appropriate homage.


–John Maynard Keynes, "Newton, the Man"[144]

Of an estimated ten million words of writing in Newton's papers, about one million deal with alchemy. Many of Newton's writings on alchemy are copies of other manuscripts, with his own annotations.[106] Alchemical texts mix artisanal knowledge with philosophical speculation, often hidden behind layers of wordplay, allegory, and imagery to protect craft secrets.[145] Some of the content contained in Newton's papers could have been considered heretical by the church.[106]
In 1888, after spending sixteen years cataloguing Newton's papers, Cambridge University kept a small number and returned the rest to the Earl of Portsmouth. In 1936, a descendant offered the papers for sale at Sotheby's.[146] The collection was broken up and sold for a total of about £9,000.[147] John Maynard Keynes was one of about three dozen bidders who obtained part of the collection at auction. Keynes went on to reassemble an estimated half of Newton's collection of papers on alchemy before donating his collection to Cambridge University in 1946.[106][146][148]
All of Newton's known writings on alchemy are currently being put online in a project undertaken by Indiana University: "The Chymistry of Isaac Newton"[149] and summarised in a book.[150][151]

Newton's fundamental contributions to science include the quantification of gravitational attraction, the discovery that white light is actually a mixture of immutable spectral colors, and the formulation of the calculus. Yet there is another, more mysterious side to Newton that is imperfectly known, a realm of activity that spanned some thirty years of his life, although he kept it largely hidden from his contemporaries and colleagues. We refer to Newton's involvement in the discipline of alchemy, or as it was often called in seventeenth-century England, "chymistry."[149]
In June 2020, two unpublished pages of Newton's notes on Jan Baptist van Helmont's book on plague, De Peste,[152] were being auctioned online by Bonhams. Newton's analysis of this book, which he made in Cambridge while protecting himself from London's 1665–1666 infection, is the most substantial written statement he is known to have made about the plague, according to Bonhams. As far as the therapy is concerned, Newton writes that "the best is a toad suspended by the legs in a chimney for three days, which at last vomited up earth with various insects in it, on to a dish of yellow wax, and shortly after died. Combining powdered toad with the excretions and serum made into lozenges and worn about the affected area drove away the contagion and drew out the poison".[153]

Legacy
See also: Isaac Newton in popular culture
Fame
Newton's tomb monument in Westminster Abbey by John Michael Rysbrack
The mathematician Joseph-Louis Lagrange said that Newton was the greatest genius who ever lived, and once added that Newton was also "the most fortunate, for we cannot find more than once a system of the world to establish."[154] English poet Alexander Pope wrote the famous epitaph:

Nature, and Nature's laws lay hid in night.
God said, Let Newton be! and all was light.
But this was not allowed to be inscribed in Newton's monument at Westminster. The epitaph added is as follows:[155]

H. S. E. ISAACUS NEWTON Eques Auratus, / Qui, animi vi prope divinâ, / Planetarum Motus, Figuras, / Cometarum semitas, Oceanique Aestus. Suâ Mathesi facem praeferente / Primus demonstravit: / Radiorum Lucis dissimilitudines, / Colorumque inde nascentium proprietates, / Quas nemo antea vel suspicatus erat, pervestigavit. / Naturae, Antiquitatis, S. Scripturae, / Sedulus, sagax, fidus Interpres / Dei O. M. Majestatem Philosophiâ asseruit, / Evangelij Simplicitatem Moribus expressit. / Sibi gratulentur Mortales, / Tale tantumque exstitisse / HUMANI GENERIS DECUS. / NAT. XXV DEC. A.D. MDCXLII. OBIIT. XX. MAR. MDCCXXVI,
which can be translated as follows:[155]

Here is buried Isaac Newton, Knight, who by a strength of mind almost divine, and mathematical principles peculiarly his own, explored the course and figures of the planets, the paths of comets, the tides of the sea, the dissimilarities in rays of light, and, what no other scholar has previously imagined, the properties of the colours thus produced. Diligent, sagacious and faithful, in his expositions of nature, antiquity and the holy Scriptures, he vindicated by his philosophy the majesty of God mighty and good, and expressed the simplicity of the Gospel in his manners. Mortals rejoice that there has existed such and so great an ornament of the human race! He was born on 25th December 1642, and died on 20th March 1726.
In a 2005 survey of members of Britain's Royal Society (formerly headed by Newton) asking who had the greater effect on the history of science, Newton or Albert Einstein, the members deemed Newton to have made the greater overall contribution.[156] In 1999, an opinion poll of 100 of the day's leading physicists voted Einstein the "greatest physicist ever," with Newton the runner-up, while a parallel survey of rank-and-file physicists by the site PhysicsWeb gave the top spot to Newton.[157][158] New Scientist called Newton "the supreme genius and most enigmatic character in the history of science".[159] Einstein kept a picture of Newton on his study wall alongside ones of Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell.[160]
Physicist Lev Landau ranked physicists on a logarithmic scale of productivity ranging from 0 to 5. The highest ranking, 0, was assigned to Newton. Albert Einstein was ranked 0.5. A rank of 1 was awarded to the "founding fathers" of quantum mechanics, Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, Paul Dirac and Erwin Schrödinger. Landau, a Nobel prize winner and discoverer of superfluidity, ranked himself as 2.[161]
The SI derived unit of force is named the newton in his honour.
Woolsthorpe Manor is a Grade I listed building by Historic England through being his birthplace and "where he discovered gravity and developed his theories regarding the refraction of light".[162]
In 1816, a tooth said to have belonged to Newton was sold for £730[163] in London to an aristocrat who had it set in a ring.[164] Guinness World Records 2002 classified it as the most valuable tooth in the world, which would value approximately £25,000 (US$35,700) in late 2001.[164] Who bought it and who currently has it has not been disclosed.

Apple incident
Main article: Isaac Newton's apple tree
Reputed descendants of Newton's apple tree at (from top to bottom): Trinity College, Cambridge, the Cambridge University Botanic Garden, and the Instituto Balseiro library garden in Argentina
Newton himself often told the story that he was inspired to formulate his theory of gravitation by watching the fall of an apple from a tree.[165][166] The story is believed to have passed into popular knowledge after being related by Catherine Barton, Newton's niece, to Voltaire.[167] Voltaire then wrote in his Essay on Epic Poetry (1727), "Sir Isaac Newton walking in his gardens, had the first thought of his system of gravitation, upon seeing an apple falling from a tree."[168][169]
Although it has been said that the apple story is a myth and that he did not arrive at his theory of gravity at any single moment,[170] acquaintances of Newton (such as William Stukeley, whose manuscript account of 1752 has been made available by the Royal Society) do in fact confirm the incident, though not the apocryphal version that the apple actually hit Newton's head. Stukeley recorded in his Memoirs of Sir Isaac Newton's Life a conversation with Newton in Kensington on 15 April 1726:[171][172][173]

we went into the garden, & drank thea under the shade of some appletrees, only he, & myself. amidst other discourse, he told me, he was just in the same situation, as when formerly, the notion of gravitation came into his mind. "why should that apple always descend perpendicularly to the ground," thought he to him self: occasion'd by the fall of an apple, as he sat in a comtemplative mood: "why should it not go sideways, or upwards? but constantly to the earths centre? assuredly, the reason is, that the earth draws it. there must be a drawing power in matter. & the sum of the drawing power in the matter of the earth must be in the earths center, not in any side of the earth. therefore dos this apple fall perpendicularly, or toward the center. if matter thus draws matter; it must be in proportion of its quantity. therefore the apple draws the earth, as well as the earth draws the apple."
John Conduitt, Newton's assistant at the Royal Mint and husband of Newton's niece, also described the event when he wrote about Newton's life:[174]

In the year 1666 he retired again from Cambridge to his mother in Lincolnshire. Whilst he was pensively meandering in a garden it came into his thought that the power of gravity (which brought an apple from a tree to the ground) was not limited to a certain distance from earth, but that this power must extend much further than was usually thought. Why not as high as the Moon said he to himself & if so, that must influence her motion & perhaps retain her in her orbit, whereupon he fell a calculating what would be the effect of that supposition.
A wood engraving of Newton's famous steps under the apple tree
It is known from his notebooks that Newton was grappling in the late 1660s with the idea that terrestrial gravity extends, in an inverse-square proportion, to the Moon; however, it took him two decades to develop the full-fledged theory.[175] The question was not whether gravity existed, but whether it extended so far from Earth that it could also be the force holding the Moon to its orbit. Newton showed that if the force decreased as the inverse square of the distance, one could indeed calculate the Moon's orbital period, and get good agreement. He guessed the same force was responsible for other orbital motions, and hence named it "universal gravitation".
Various trees are claimed to be "the" apple tree which Newton describes. The King's School, Grantham claims that the tree was purchased by the school, uprooted and transported to the headmaster's garden some years later. The staff of the (now) National Trust-owned Woolsthorpe Manor dispute this, and claim that a tree present in their gardens is the one described by Newton. A descendant of the original tree[176] can be seen growing outside the main gate of Trinity College, Cambridge, below the room Newton lived in when he studied there. The National Fruit Collection at Brogdale in Kent[177] can supply grafts from their tree, which appears identical to Flower of Kent, a coarse-fleshed cooking variety.[178]

Commemorations
Newton statue on display at the Oxford University Museum of Natural History
Newton's monument (1731) can be seen in Westminster Abbey, at the north of the entrance to the choir against the choir screen, near his tomb. It was executed by the sculptor Michael Rysbrack (1694–1770) in white and grey marble with design by the architect William Kent.[179] The monument features a figure of Newton reclining on top of a sarcophagus, his right elbow resting on several of his great books and his left hand pointing to a scroll with a mathematical design. Above him is a pyramid and a celestial globe showing the signs of the Zodiac and the path of the comet of 1680. A relief panel depicts putti using instruments such as a telescope and prism.[180]
From 1978 until 1988, an image of Newton designed by Harry Ecclestone appeared on Series D £1 banknotes issued by the Bank of England (the last £1 notes to be issued by the Bank of England). Newton was shown on the reverse of the notes holding a book and accompanied by a telescope, a prism and a map of the Solar System.[181]
A statue of Isaac Newton, looking at an apple at his feet, can be seen at the Oxford University Museum of Natural History. A large bronze statue, Newton, after William Blake, by Eduardo Paolozzi, dated 1995 and inspired by Blake's etching, dominates the piazza of the British Library in London. A bronze statue of Newton was erected in 1858 in the centre of Grantham where he went to school, prominently standing in front of Grantham Guildhall.
The still-surviving farmhouse at Woolsthorpe By Colsterworth is a Grade I listed building by Historic England through being his birthplace and "where he discovered gravity and developed his theories regarding the refraction of light".[162]


The Enlightenment
Enlightenment philosophers chose a short history of scientific predecessors—Galileo, Boyle, and Newton principally—as the guides and guarantors of their applications of the singular concept of nature and natural law to every physical and social field of the day. In this respect, the lessons of history and the social structures built upon it could be discarded.[182]
It is held by European philosophers of the Enlightenment and by historians of the Enlightenment that Newton's publication of the Principia was a turning point in the Scientific Revolution and started the Enlightenment. It was Newton's conception of the universe based upon natural and rationally understandable laws that became one of the seeds for Enlightenment ideology.[183] Locke and Voltaire applied concepts of natural law to political systems advocating intrinsic rights; the physiocrats and Adam Smith applied natural conceptions of psychology and self-interest to economic systems; and sociologists criticised the current social order for trying to fit history into natural models of progress. Monboddo and Samuel Clarke resisted elements of Newton's work, but eventually rationalised it to conform with their strong religious views of nature.

Works
Published in his lifetime
De analysi per aequationes numero terminorum infinitas (1669, published 1711)[184]
Of Natures Obvious Laws & Processes in Vegetation (unpublished, c. 1671–75)[185]
De motu corporum in gyrum (1684)[186]
Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica (1687)[187]
Scala graduum Caloris. Calorum Descriptiones & signa (1701)[188]
Opticks (1704)[189]
Reports as Master of the Mint (1701–1725)[190]
Arithmetica Universalis (1707)[190]
Published posthumously
De mundi systemate (The System of the World) (1728)[190]
Optical Lectures (1728)[190]
The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728)[190]
Observations on Daniel and The Apocalypse of St. John (1733)[190]
Method of Fluxions (1671, published 1736)[191]
An Historical Account of Two Notable Corruptions of Scripture (1754)[190]
See also
Elements of the Philosophy of Newton, a book by Voltaire
List of multiple discoveries: seventeenth century
List of things named after Isaac Newton
List of presidents of the Royal Society
References
Notes


^ a b c d e During Newton's lifetime, two calendars were in use in Europe: the Julian ("Old Style") calendar in Protestant and Orthodox regions, including Britain; and the Gregorian ("New Style") calendar in Roman Catholic Europe. At Newton's birth, Gregorian dates were ten days ahead of Julian dates; thus, his birth is recorded as taking place on 25 December 1642 Old Style, but it can be converted to a New Style (modern) date of 4 January 1643. By the time of his death, the difference between the calendars had increased to eleven days. Moreover, he died in the period after the start of the New Style year on 1 January but before that of the Old Style new year on 25 March. His death occurred on 20 March 1726, according to the Old Style calendar, but the year is usually adjusted to 1727. A full conversion to New Style gives the date 31 March 1727.[6][self-published source?]

^ This claim was made by William Stukeley in 1727, in a letter about Newton written to Richard Mead. Charles Hutton, who in the late eighteenth century collected oral traditions about earlier scientists, declared that there "do not appear to be any sufficient reason for his never marrying, if he had an inclination so to do. It is much more likely that he had a constitutional indifference to the state, and even to the sex in general."[111]


Citations


^ a b "Fellows of the Royal Society". London: Royal Society. Archived from the original on 16 March 2015.

^ Feingold, Mordechai. Barrow, Isaac (1630–1677) Archived 29 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, September 2004; online edn, May 2007. Retrieved 24 February 2009; explained further in Feingold, Mordechai (1993). "Newton, Leibniz, and Barrow Too: An Attempt at a Reinterpretation". Isis. 84 (2): 310–338. Bibcode:1993Isis...84..310F. doi:10.1086/356464. JSTOR 236236. S2CID 144019197.

^ "Dictionary of Scientific Biography". Notes, No. 4. Archived from the original on 25 February 2005.

^ Gjertsen 1986, p. [page needed]

^ Kevin C. Knox, Richard Noakes (eds.), From Newton to Hawking: A History of Cambridge University's Lucasian Professors of Mathematics, Cambridge University Press, 2003, p. 61.

^ Thony, Christie (2015). "Calendrical confusion or just when did Newton die?". The Renaissance Mathematicus. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 20 March 2015.

^ Alex, Berezow (4 February 2022). "Who was the smartest person in the world?". Big Think. Archived from the original on 28 September 2023. Retrieved 28 September 2023.

^ Whiteside, D. T. (1991). "The Prehistory of the 'Principia' from 1664 to 1686". Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London. 45 (1): 11–61. doi:10.1098/rsnr.1991.0002. ISSN 0035-9149. JSTOR 531520. S2CID 145338571. Archived from the original on 13 April 2023. Retrieved 8 May 2023.

^ Gandt, F. D. (2014). Force and Geometry in Newton's Principia. Princeton University Press. pp. ix–xii. ISBN 978-1-4008-6412-6. Archived from the original on 2 July 2023. Retrieved 8 May 2023.

^ a b Newman, James Roy (1956). The World of Mathematics: A Small Library of the Literature of Mathematics from Aʻh-mosé the Scribe to Albert Einstein. Simon and Schuster. p. 58.

^ a b Sastry, S.Subramanya, The Newton-Leibniz controversy over the invention of the calculus (PDF), University of Wisconsin–Madison, p. 3, doi:10.1214/ss/1028905930, archived (PDF) from the original on 8 January 2024, retrieved 12 October 2023

^ More, Louis Trenchard (1934). Isaac Newton, a Biography. Dover Publications. p. 327.

^ Hatch, Robert A. (1988). "Sir Isaac Newton". Archived from the original on 5 November 2022. Retrieved 13 June 2023.

^ Storr, Anthony (December 1985). "Isaac Newton". British Medical Journal (Clinical Research Edition). 291 (6511): 1779–84. doi:10.1136/bmj.291.6511.1779. JSTOR 29521701. PMC 1419183. PMID 3936583.

^ Keynes, Milo (20 September 2008). "Balancing Newton's Mind: His Singular Behaviour and His Madness of 1692–93". Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London. 62 (3): 289–300. doi:10.1098/rsnr.2007.0025. JSTOR 20462679. PMID 19244857.

^ Westfall 1980, p. 55.

^ "Newton the Mathematician" Z. Bechler, ed., Contemporary Newtonian Research(Dordrecht 1982) pp. 110–111

^ Westfall 1994, pp. 16–19.

^ White 1997, p. 22.

^ Westfall 1980, pp. 60–62.

^ Westfall 1980, pp. 71, 103.

^ Taylor, Henry Martyn (1911). "Newton, Sir Isaac" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 19 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 583.

^ Hoskins, Michael, ed. (1997). Cambridge Illustrated History of Astronomy. Cambridge University Press. p. 159. ISBN 978-0-521-41158-5.

^ Newton, Isaac. "Waste Book". Cambridge University Digital Library. Archived from the original on 8 January 2012. Retrieved 10 January 2012.

^ a b Struik, Dirk J. (1948). A Concise History of Mathematics. Dover Publications. pp. 151, 154.

^ a b McDonald, Kerry (27 March 2020). "How Isaac Newton Turned Isolation From the Great Plague Into a "Year of Wonders"". fee.org. Archived from the original on 24 September 2023. Retrieved 14 October 2023.

^ "Newton, Isaac (NWTN661I)". A Cambridge Alumni Database. University of Cambridge.

^ Westfall 1980, p. 178.

^ Westfall 1980, p. 179.

^ Westfall 1980, pp. 330–331.

^ White 1997, p. 151.

^ Ball 1908, p. 319.

^ Whiteside, D.T., ed. (1967). "Part 7: The October 1666 Tract on Fluxions". The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton. 1. Cambridge University Press. p. 400. Archived 12 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Gjertsen 1986, p. 149.

^ "How and Why did Newton Develop Such Complicated Mathematics?". Futurism. 17 July 2017. Archived from the original on 20 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023.

^ Newton, Principia, 1729 English translation, p. 41 Archived 3 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Newton, Principia, 1729 English translation, p. 54 Archived 3 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Newton, Sir Isaac (1850). Newton's Principia: The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. Geo. P. Putnam. Archived from the original on 26 June 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2019.

^ Clifford Truesdell, Essays in the History of Mechanics (1968), p. 99.

^ In the preface to the Marquis de L'Hospital's Analyse des Infiniment Petits (Paris, 1696).

^ Starting with De motu corporum in gyrum, see also (Latin) Theorem 1 Archived 12 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Whiteside, D.T., ed. (1970). "The Mathematical principles underlying Newton's Principia Mathematica". Journal for the History of Astronomy. 1. Cambridge University Press. pp. 116–138.

^ Stewart 2009, p. 107.

^ Westfall 1980, pp. 538–539.

^ Stern, Keith (2009). Queers in history : the comprehensive encyclopedia of historical gays, lesbians, bisexuals, and transgenders. Dallas, Tex.: BenBella. ISBN 978-1-933771-87-8. OCLC 317453194. Archived from the original on 26 February 2024. Retrieved 30 November 2022.

^ Nowlan, Robert (2017). Masters of Mathematics: The Problems They Solved, Why These Are Important, and What You Should Know about Them. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers. p. 136. ISBN 978-94-6300-891-4.

^ Ball 1908, p. 356.

^ Błaszczyk, P.; et al. (March 2013). "Ten misconceptions from the history of analysis and their debunking". Foundations of Science. 18 (1): 43–74. arXiv:1202.4153. doi:10.1007/s10699-012-9285-8. S2CID 119134151.

^ King, Henry C. (1955). The History of the Telescope. Courier Corporation. p. 74. ISBN 978-0-486-43265-6. Archived from the original on 26 February 2024. Retrieved 1 August 2013.

^ Whittaker, E.T., A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity, Dublin University Press, 1910.

^ Darrigol, Olivier (2012). A History of Optics from Greek Antiquity to the Nineteenth Century. Oxford University Press. p. 81. ISBN 978-0-19-964437-7. Archived from the original on 26 February 2024. Retrieved 1 December 2018.

^ Newton, Isaac. "Hydrostatics, Optics, Sound and Heat". Cambridge University Digital Library. Archived from the original on 8 January 2012. Retrieved 10 January 2012.

^ Ball 1908, p. 324.

^ William R. Newman, "Newton's Early Optical Theory and its Debt to Chymistry", in Danielle Jacquart and Michel Hochmann, eds., Lumière et vision dans les sciences et dans les arts (Geneva: Droz, 2010), pp. 283–307. A free access online version of this article can be found at the Chymistry of Isaac Newton project Archived 28 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine (PDF)

^ Ball 1908, p. 325.

^ "The Early Period (1608–1672)". James R. Graham's Home Page. Retrieved 3 February 2009.[permanent dead link]

^ a b White 1997, p. 170

^ Hall, Alfred Rupert (1996). Isaac Newton: adventurer in thought. Cambridge University Press. p. 67. ISBN 978-0-521-56669-8. OCLC 606137087. This is the one dated 23 February 1669, in which Newton described his first reflecting telescope, constructed (it seems) near the close of the previous year.

^ White 1997, p. 168.

^ Newton, Isaac. "Of Colours". The Newton Project. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 6 October 2014.

^ a b See 'Correspondence of Isaac Newton, vol. 2, 1676–1687' ed. H.W. Turnbull, Cambridge University Press 1960; at p. 297, document No. 235, letter from Hooke to Newton dated 24 November 1679.

^ Iliffe, Robert (2007) Newton. A very short introduction, Oxford University Press 2007

^ a b Westfall, Richard S. (1983) [1980]. Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 530–31. ISBN 978-0-521-27435-7.

^ a b Keynes, John Maynard (1972). "Newton, The Man". The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes Volume X. MacMillan St. Martin's Press. pp. 363–66.

^ Dobbs, J. T. (December 1982). "Newton's Alchemy and His Theory of Matter". Isis. 73 (4): 523. doi:10.1086/353114. S2CID 170669199. quoting Opticks

^ Opticks, 2nd Ed 1706. Query 8.

^ a b Duarte, F. J. (2000). "Newton, prisms, and the 'opticks' of tunable lasers" (PDF). Optics and Photonics News. 11 (5): 24–25. Bibcode:2000OptPN..11...24D. doi:10.1364/OPN.11.5.000024. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 February 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2015.

^ Tyndall, John. (1880). Popular Science Monthly Volume 17, July. s:Popular Science Monthly/Volume 17/July 1880/Goethe's Farbenlehre: Theory of Colors II

^ Inwood, Stephen (2003). The Forgotten Genius. San Francisco: MacAdam/Cage Pub. p. 247. ISBN 978-1-931561-56-3. OCLC 53006741.

^ Westfall 1980, pp. 391–392.

^ Whiteside, D.T., ed. (1974). Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton, 1684–1691. 6. Cambridge University Press. p. 30.

^ a b Schmitz, Kenneth S. (2018). Physical Chemistry: Multidisciplinary Applications in Society. Amsterdam: Elsevier. p. 251. ISBN 978-0-12-800599-6. Archived from the original on 10 March 2020. Retrieved 1 March 2020.

^ Brewster, Sir David (22 March 1860). "Memoirs of the Life, Writings, and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton". Edmonston and Douglas. Archived from the original on 19 April 2023. Retrieved 22 March 2023 – via Google Books.

^ See Curtis Wilson, "The Newtonian achievement in astronomy", pp. 233–274 in R Taton & C Wilson (eds) (1989) The General History of Astronomy, Volume, 2A', at p. 233 Archived 3 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Text quotations are from 1729 translation of Newton's Principia, Book 3 (1729 vol.2) at pp. 232–33 [233].

^ Edelglass et al., Matter and Mind, ISBN 0-940262-45-2. p. 54

^ On the meaning and origins of this expression, see Kirsten Walsh, Does Newton feign an hypothesis? Archived 14 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Early Modern Experimental Philosophy Archived 21 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, 18 October 2010.

^ Westfall 1980, Chapter 11.

^ a b Hatch, Professor Robert A. "Newton Timeline". Archived from the original on 2 August 2012. Retrieved 13 August 2012.

^ Bloye, Nicole; Huggett, Stephen (2011). "Newton, the geometer" (PDF). Newsletter of the European Mathematical Society (82): 19–27. MR 2896438. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 March 2023. Retrieved 19 February 2023.

^ Conics and Cubics, Robert Bix. Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics, 2nd ed., 2006, Springer Verlag.

^ "John Locke Manuscripts – Chronological Listing: 1690". psu.edu. Archived from the original on 9 July 2017. Retrieved 20 January 2013.; and John C. Attig, John Locke Bibliography — Chapter 5, Religion, 1751–1900 Archived 12 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine

^ White 1997, p. 232.

^ Sawer, Patrick (6 September 2016). "What students should avoid during fresher's week (100 years ago and now)". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 7 September 2016.

^ "Isaac Newton: Physicist And ... Crime Fighter?". Science Friday. 5 June 2009. NPR. Archived from the original on 1 November 2014. Transcript. Retrieved 1 August 2014.

^ Levenson 2010.

^ White 1997, p. 259.

^ White 1997, p. 267.

^ Newton, Isaac. "Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica". Cambridge University Digital Library. pp. 265–66. Archived from the original on 8 January 2012. Retrieved 10 January 2012.

^ Westfall 2007, p. 73.

^ Wagner, Anthony (1972). Historic Heraldry of Britain (2nd ed.). London and Chichester: Phillimore. p. 85. ISBN 978-0-85033-022-9.; and Genealogical Memoranda Relating to the Family of Newton. London: Taylor and Co. 1871.

^ White 1997, p. 317.

^ "The Queen's 'great Assistance' to Newton's election was his knighting, an honor bestowed not for his contributions to science, nor for his service at the Mint, but for the greater glory of party politics in the election of 1705." Westfall 1994, p. 245

^ "This Day in History: Isaac Newton is Knighted". History Channel. A&E Television Networks. 20 June 2016. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 18 August 2014; and Barnham, Kay (2014). Isaac Newton. Raintree. p. 26. ISBN 978-1-4109-6235-5.

^ On the Value of Gold and Silver in European Currencies and the Consequences on the Worldwide Gold- and Silver-Trade Archived 6 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Sir Isaac Newton, 21 September 1717; "By The King, A Proclamation Declaring the Rates at which Gold shall be current in Payments". Royal Numismatic Society. V. April 1842 – January 1843.

^ Fay, C. R. (1 January 1935). "Newton and the Gold Standard". Cambridge Historical Journal. 5 (1): 109–17. doi:10.1017/S1474691300001256. JSTOR 3020836.

^ "Sir Isaac Newton's Unpublished Manuscripts Explain Connections He Made Between Alchemy and Economics". Georgia Tech Research News. 12 September 2006. Archived from the original on 17 February 2013. Retrieved 30 July 2014.

^ Eric W. Nye, Pounds Sterling to Dollars: Historical Conversion of Currency Archived 15 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved: 5 October 2020

^ Holodny, Elena (21 January 2016). "Isaac Newton was a genius, but even he lost millions in the stock market". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. Retrieved 21 December 2019.

^ Yonge, Charlotte M. (1898). "Cranbury and Brambridge". John Keble's Parishes – Chapter 6. online-literature.com. Archived from the original on 8 December 2008. Retrieved 23 September 2009.

^ Westfall 1980, p. 44.

^ Westfall 1980, p. 595.

^ "No. 6569". The London Gazette. 1 April 1727. p. 7.

^ Dobre and Nyden suggest that there is no clear evidence that Voltaire was present; see p. 89 of Dobre, Mihnea; Nyden, Tammy (2013). Cartesian Empiricism. Springer. ISBN 978-94-007-7690-6.

^ a b "Newton, Isaac (1642–1727)". Eric Weisstein's World of Biography. Eric W. Weisstein. Archived from the original on 28 April 2006. Retrieved 30 August 2006.

^ a b c d Mann, Adam (14 May 2014). "The Strange, Secret History of Isaac Newton's Papers". Wired. Archived from the original on 11 September 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2016.

^ Vining, John (2 August 2011). "Newton's Death Mask". The Huntington. Archived from the original on 7 August 2023. Retrieved 7 August 2023.

^ "Death mask of Isaac Newton". Royal Society Picture Library. Archived from the original on 7 August 2023. Retrieved 7 August 2023.

^ "Newton's death mask scanned in 3D". Royal Society. 1 October 2012. Archived from the original on 9 June 2023. Retrieved 7 August 2023.

^ Schultz, Colin (1 October 2012). "Isaac Newton's Death Mask: Now Available in Digital 3D". Smithsonian Magazine. Archived from the original on 7 August 2023. Retrieved 7 August 2023.

^ Hutton, Charles (1795/6). A Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary. vol. 2. p. 100.

^ Voltaire (1894). "14". Letters on England. Cassell. p. 100.

^ Hutton, Charles (1815). A Philosophical and Mathematical Dictionary Containing ... Memoirs of the Lives and Writings of the Most Eminent Authors, Volume 2. p. 100. Archived from the original on 26 February 2024. Retrieved 1 December 2018.

^ Keynes, John Maynard. "Newton: the Man". University of St Andrews School of Mathematics and Statistics. Archived from the original on 17 June 2019. Retrieved 11 September 2012.

^ Sagan, Carl (1980). Cosmos. New York: Random House. p. 68. ISBN 978-0-394-50294-6.

^ "Duillier, Nicholas Fatio de (1664–1753) mathematician and natural philosopher". Janus database. Archived from the original on 1 July 2013. Retrieved 22 March 2013.

^ "Collection Guide: Fatio de Duillier, Nicolas [Letters to Isaac Newton]". Online Archive of California. Archived from the original on 31 May 2013. Retrieved 22 March 2013.

^ Westfall 1980, pp. 493–497 on the friendship with Fatio, pp. 531–540 on Newton's breakdown.

^ Manuel 1968, p. 219.

^ Letter from Isaac Newton to Robert Hooke, 5 February 1676, as transcribed in Maury, Jean-Pierre (1992) [1990]. Newton: Understanding the Cosmos. "New Horizons" series. Translated by Paris, I. Mark. London: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-30023-7. Archived from the original on 21 December 2020. Retrieved 18 October 2020.

^ John Gribbin (2002) Science: A History 1543–2001, p. 164.

^ White 1997, p. 187.

^ Memoirs of the Life, Writings, and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton (1855) by Sir David Brewster (Volume II. Ch. 27)

^ Richard S. Westfall – Indiana University The Galileo Project. (Rice University). Archived from the original on 29 September 2020. Retrieved 5 July 2008.

^ a b c d Snobelen, Stephen D. (December 1999). "Isaac Newton, heretic: the strategies of a Nicodemite". The British Journal for the History of Science. 32 (4): 381–419. doi:10.1017/S0007087499003751. JSTOR 4027945. S2CID 145208136.

^ a b Katz 1992, p. 63.

^ Westfall 1980, p. 315.

^ Westfall 1980, p. 321.

^ Westfall 1980, pp. 331–34.

^ Westfall 1994, p. 124.

^ "Newton, object 1 (Butlin 306) "Newton"". William Blake Archive. 25 September 2013. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 25 September 2013.

^ Newton, Isaac (1782). Isaaci Newtoni Opera quae exstant omnia. London: Joannes Nichols. pp. 436–37. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2020.

^ Observations upon the Prophecies of Daniel, and the Apocalypse of St. John Archived 20 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine 1733

^ John P. Meier, A Marginal Jew, v. 1, pp. 382–402. after narrowing the years to 30 or 33, provisionally judges 30 most likely.

^ Newton to Richard Bentley 10 December 1692, in Turnbull et al. (1959–77), vol 3, p. 233.

^ Opticks, 2nd Ed 1706. Query 31.

^ H.G. Alexander (ed) The Leibniz-Clarke correspondence, Manchester University Press, 1998, p. 11.

^ Tyson, Neil Degrasse (1 November 2005). "The Perimeter of Ignorance". Natural History Magazine. Archived from the original on 6 September 2018. Retrieved 7 January 2016.

^ Dijksterhuis, E. J. The Mechanization of the World Picture, IV 329–330, Oxford University Press, 1961. The author's final comment on this episode is:"The mechanization of the world picture led with irresistible coherence to the conception of God as a sort of 'retired engineer', and from here to God's complete elimination it took just one more step".

^ Brewster states that Newton was never known as an Arian during his lifetime, it was William Whiston, an Arian, who first argued that "Sir Isaac Newton was so hearty for the Baptists, as well as for the Eusebians or Arians, that he sometimes suspected these two were the two witnesses in the Revelations," while others like Hopton Haynes (a Mint employee and Humanitarian), "mentioned to Richard Baron, that Newton held the same doctrine as himself". David Brewster. Memoirs of the Life, Writings, and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton. p. 268.

^ Jacob, Margaret C. (1976). The Newtonians and the English Revolution: 1689–1720. Cornell University Press. pp. 37, 44. ISBN 978-0-85527-066-7.

^ Westfall, Richard S. (1958). Science and Religion in Seventeenth-Century England. New Haven: Yale University Press. p. 200. ISBN 978-0-208-00843-5.

^ Haakonssen, Knud (1996). "The Enlightenment, politics and providence: some Scottish and English comparisons". In Martin Fitzpatrick (ed.). Enlightenment and Religion: Rational Dissent in Eighteenth-century Britain. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 64. ISBN 978-0-521-56060-3.

^ "John Maynard Keynes: Newton, the Man". Maths History. Archived from the original on 17 June 2019. Retrieved 6 May 2023.

^ Meyer, Michal (2014). "Gold, secrecy and prestige". Chemical Heritage Magazine. 32 (1): 42–43. Archived from the original on 20 March 2018. Retrieved 20 March 2018.

^ a b Kean, Sam (2011). "Newton, The Last Magician". Humanities. 32 (1). Archived from the original on 13 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016.

^ Greshko, Michael (4 April 2016). "Isaac Newton's Lost Alchemy Recipe Rediscovered". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 26 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016.

^ Dry, Sarah (2014). The Newton papers : the strange and true odyssey of Isaac Newton's manuscripts. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-995104-8.

^ a b "The Chymistry of Isaac Newton". Indiana University, Bloomington. Archived from the original on 26 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016.

^ Levitin, Dimitri (March 2019). "Going for Gold". Literary Review. Archived from the original on 7 March 2019. Retrieved 6 March 2019.

^ Newman, William R. (2018). Newton the Alchemist Science, Enigma, and the Quest for Nature's "Secret Fire". Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-17487-7. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 6 March 2019.

^ Van Helmont, Iohannis Baptistae, Opuscula Medica Inaudita: IV. De Peste, Editor Hieronymo Christian Paullo (Frankfurt am Main) Publisher Sumptibus Hieronimi Christiani Pauli, typis Matthiæ Andreæ, 1707.

^ Flood, Alison (2 June 2020). "Isaac Newton proposed curing plague with toad vomit, unseen papers show". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 June 2020. Retrieved 6 June 2020.

^ Fred L. Wilson, History of Science: Newton citing: Delambre, M. "Notice sur la vie et les ouvrages de M. le comte J.L. Lagrange", Oeuvres de Lagrange I. Paris, 1867, p. xx.

^ a b Westminster Abbey. "Sir Isaac Newton Scientist, Mathematician and Astronomer". westminster-abbey.org. Archived from the original on 9 August 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022.

^ "Newton beats Einstein in polls of Royal Society scientists and the public". The Royal Society. Archived from the original on 13 July 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2010.

^ "Opinion poll. Einstein voted 'greatest physicist ever' by leading physicists; Newton runner-up". BBC News. 29 November 1999. Archived from the original on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 17 January 2012.

^ "Newton tops PhysicsWeb poll". Physics World. 29 November 1999. Archived from the original on 20 October 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2023.

^ "Isaac Newton". New Scientist. Archived from the original on 28 September 2023. Retrieved 28 September 2023.

^ Gleeson-White, Jane (10 November 2003). "Einstein's Heroes". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 28 November 2019. Retrieved 29 September 2021.

^ Li, Jichao; Yin, Yian; Fortunato, Santo; Wang, Dashun (18 April 2019). "Nobel laureates are almost the same as us". Nature Reviews Physics. 1 (5): 301–303. Bibcode:2019NatRP...1..301L. doi:10.1038/s42254-019-0057-z. Archived from the original on 15 April 2024. Retrieved 9 April 2024.

^ a b Historic England. "Woolsthorpe Manor House, Colsterworth (1062362)". National Heritage List for England. Retrieved 5 October 2021.

^ "Silly relic-worship". The New York Times. 16 January 1881. p. 10. Archived from the original on 20 January 2019. Retrieved 12 July 2009.

^ a b Cunningham, Antonia, ed. (2002). Guinness World Records 2002. Bantam. ISBN 978-0-553-58378-6. Archived from the original on 9 August 2022. Retrieved 12 July 2009.

^ White 1997, p. 86.

^ Numbers 2015, pp. 48–56.

^ Malament, David B. (2002). Reading Natural Philosophy: Essays in the History and Philosophy of Science and Mathematics. Open Court Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8126-9507-6. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2020.

^ Voltaire (1727). An Essay upon the Civil Wars of France, extracted from curious Manuscripts and also upon the Epick Poetry of the European Nations, from Homer down to Milton. London, England: Samuel Jallasson. p. 104. Archived from the original on 14 June 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2021. From p. 104: 'In the like Manner Pythagoras ow'd the Invention of Musik to the noise of the Hammer of a Blacksmith. And thus in our Days Sir Isaak Newton walking in his Garden had the first Thought of his System of Gravitation, upon seeing an apple falling from a Tree.'

^ Voltaire (1786) heard the story of Newton and the apple tree from Newton's niece, Catherine Conduit (née Barton) (1679–1740): Voltaire (1786). Oeuvres completes de Voltaire [The complete works of Voltaire] (in French). Vol. 31. Basel, Switzerland: Jean-Jacques Tourneisen. p. 175. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 15 June 2021. From p. 175: "Un jour en l'année 1666, Newton retiré à la campagne, et voyant tomber des fruits d'un arbre, à ce que m'a conté sa nièce, (Mme Conduit) se laissa aller à une méditation profonde sur la cause qui entraine ainsi tous les corps dans une ligne, qui, si elle était prolongée, passerait à peu près par le centre de la terre." (One day in the year 1666 Newton withdrew to the country, and seeing the fruits of a tree fall, according to what his niece (Madame Conduit) told me, he entered into a deep meditation on the cause that draws all bodies in a [straight] line, which, if it were extended, would pass very near to the center of the Earth.)

^ Berkun, Scott (2010). The Myths of Innovation. O'Reilly Media, Inc. p. 4. ISBN 978-1-4493-8962-8. Archived from the original on 17 March 2020. Retrieved 1 December 2018.

^ "Newton's apple: The real story". New Scientist. 18 January 2010. Archived from the original on 21 January 2010. Retrieved 10 May 2010.

^ Hamblyn, Richard (2011). "Newtonian Apples: William Stukeley". The Art of Science. Pan Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4472-0415-2. Archived from the original on 9 March 2020. Retrieved 1 December 2018.

^ "Revised Memoir of Newton (Normalized Version)". The Newton Project. Archived from the original on 14 March 2017. Retrieved 13 March 2017.

^ Conduitt, John. "Keynes Ms. 130.4:Conduitt's account of Newton's life at Cambridge". Newtonproject. Imperial College London. Archived from the original on 7 November 2009. Retrieved 30 August 2006.

^ I. Bernard Cohen and George E. Smith, eds. The Cambridge Companion to Newton (2002) p. 6

^ Alberto A. Martinez Science Secrets: The Truth about Darwin's Finches, Einstein's Wife, and Other Myths, p. 69 (University of Pittsburgh Press, 2011); ISBN 978-0-8229-4407-2

^ "Brogdale – Home of the National Fruit Collection". Brogdale.org. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008. Retrieved 20 December 2008.

^ "From the National Fruit Collection: Isaac Newton's Tree". Retrieved 10 January 2009.[permanent dead link] Alternate Page Archived 5 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 5 July 2022.

^ 'The Abbey Scientists' Hall, A.R. p13: London; Roger & Robert Nicholson; 1966

^ "Famous People & the Abbey: Sir Isaac Newton". Westminster Abbey. Archived from the original on 16 October 2009. Retrieved 13 November 2009.

^ "Withdrawn banknotes reference guide". Bank of England. Archived from the original on 5 May 2010. Retrieved 27 August 2009.

^ Cassels, Alan. Ideology and International Relations in the Modern World. p. 2.

^ "Although it was just one of the many factors in the Enlightenment, the success of Newtonian physics in providing a mathematical description of an ordered world clearly played a big part in the flowering of this movement in the eighteenth century" by John Gribbin, Science: A History 1543–2001 (2002), p. 241 ISBN 978-0-7139-9503-9

^ Anders Hald 2003 – A history of probability and statistics and their applications before 1750 – 586 pages Volume 501 of Wiley series in probability and statistics Wiley-IEEE, 2003 Archived 2 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 27 January 2012 ISBN 0-471-47129-1

^ "Natures obvious laws & processes in vegetation – Introduction". The Chymistry of Isaac Newton. Archived from the original on 17 January 2021. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Transcribed and online at Indiana University.

^ Whiteside, D.T., ed. (1974). Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton, 1684–1691. 6. Cambridge University Press. pp. 30–91. Archived 10 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Museum of London exhibit including facsimile of title page from John Flamsteed's copy of 1687 edition of Newton's Principia". Museumoflondon.org.uk. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 16 March 2012.

^ Published anonymously as "Scala graduum Caloris. Calorum Descriptiones & signa." in Philosophical Transactions, 1701, 824 Archived 21 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine–829;
ed. Joannes Nichols, Isaaci Newtoni Opera quae exstant omnia, vol. 4 (1782), 403 Archived 17 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine–407.
Mark P. Silverman, A Universe of Atoms, An Atom in the Universe, Springer, 2002, p. 49. Archived 24 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine

^ Newton, Isaac (1704). Opticks or, a Treatise of the reflexions, refractions, inflexions and colours of light. Also two treatises of the species and magnitude of curvilinear figures. Sam. Smith. and Benj. Walford. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 17 March 2018.

^ a b c d e f g Pickover, Clifford (2008). Archimedes to Hawking: Laws of Science and the Great Minds Behind Them. Oxford University Press. pp. 117–18. ISBN 978-0-19-979268-9. Archived from the original on 26 February 2024. Retrieved 17 March 2018.

^ Swetz, Frank J. "Mathematical Treasure: Newton's Method of Fluxions". Convergence. Mathematical Association of America. Archived from the original on 28 June 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2018.


Bibliography

Ball, W. W. Rouse (1908). A Short Account of the History of Mathematics. New York: Dover. ISBN 978-0-486-20630-1.
Gjertsen, Derek (1986). The Newton Handbook. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. ISBN 0-7102-0279-2.
Katz, David S. (1992). "Englishness and Medieval Anglo-Jewry". In Kushner, Tony (ed.). The Marginalization of Early Modern Jewish History. Frank Cass. pp. 42–59. ISBN 0-7146-3464-6.
Levenson, Thomas (2010). Newton and the Counterfeiter: The Unknown Detective Career of the World's Greatest Scientist. Mariner Books. ISBN 978-0-547-33604-6.
Manuel, Frank E. (1968). A Portrait of Isaac Newton. Belknap Press of Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Numbers, R. L. (2015). Newton's Apple and Other Myths about Science. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-91547-3. Archived from the original on 8 July 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2018.
Stewart, James (2009). Calculus: Concepts and Contexts. Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-0-495-55742-5.
Westfall, Richard S. (1980). Never at Rest. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-27435-7.
Westfall, Richard S. (2007). Isaac Newton. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-921355-9.
Westfall, Richard S. (1994). The Life of Isaac Newton. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-47737-6.
White, Michael (1997). Isaac Newton: The Last Sorcerer. Fourth Estate Limited. ISBN 978-1-85702-416-6.

Further reading
Primary

Newton, Isaac. The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. University of California Press, (1999)
Brackenridge, J. Bruce. The Key to Newton's Dynamics: The Kepler Problem and the Principia: Containing an English Translation of Sections 1, 2, and 3 of Book One from the First (1687) Edition of Newton's Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, University of California Press (1996)
Newton, Isaac. The Optical Papers of Isaac Newton. Vol. 1: The Optical Lectures, 1670–1672, Cambridge University Press (1984)
Newton, Isaac. Opticks (4th ed. 1730) online edition
Newton, I. (1952). Opticks, or A Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflections & Colours of Light. New York: Dover Publications.
Newton, I. Sir Isaac Newton's Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy and His System of the World, tr. A. Motte, rev. Florian Cajori. Berkeley: University of California Press (1934)
Whiteside, D. T., ed. (1967–1982). The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-07740-8. – 8 volumes.
Newton, Isaac. The correspondence of Isaac Newton, ed. H.W. Turnbull and others, 7 vols (1959–77)
Newton's Philosophy of Nature: Selections from His Writings edited by H.S. Thayer (1953; online edition)
Isaac Newton, Sir; J Edleston; Roger Cotes, Correspondence of Sir Isaac Newton and Professor Cotes, including letters of other eminent men, London, John W. Parker, West Strand; Cambridge, John Deighton (1850, Google Books)
Maclaurin, C. (1748). An Account of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophical Discoveries, in Four Books. London: A. Millar and J. Nourse
Newton, I. (1958). Isaac Newton's Papers and Letters on Natural Philosophy and Related Documents, eds. I.B. Cohen and R.E. Schofield. Cambridge: Harvard University Press
Newton, I. (1962). The Unpublished Scientific Papers of Isaac Newton: A Selection from the Portsmouth Collection in the University Library, Cambridge, ed. A.R. Hall and M.B. Hall. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Newton, I. (1975). Isaac Newton's 'Theory of the Moon's Motion' (1702). London: Dawson

Alchemy

Craig, John (1946). Newton at the Mint. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Craig, John (1953). "XII. Isaac Newton". The Mint: A History of the London Mint from A.D. 287 to 1948. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. pp. 198–222. ASIN B0000CIHG7.
de Villamil, Richard (1931). Newton, the Man. London: G. D. Knox. – Preface by Albert Einstein. Reprinted by Johnson Reprint Corporation, New York (1972)
Dobbs, B. J. T. (1975). The Foundations of Newton's Alchemy or "The Hunting of the Greene Lyon". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Keynes, John Maynard (1963). Essays in Biography. W. W. Norton & Co. ISBN 978-0-393-00189-1. Keynes took a close interest in Newton and owned many of Newton's private papers.
Stukeley, W. (1936). Memoirs of Sir Isaac Newton's Life. London: Taylor and Francis. (edited by A.H. White; originally published in 1752)
Trabue, J. "Ann and Arthur Storer of Calvert County, Maryland, Friends of Sir Isaac Newton," The American Genealogist 79 (2004): 13–27.

Religion

Dobbs, Betty Jo Tetter. The Janus Faces of Genius: The Role of Alchemy in Newton's Thought. (1991), links the alchemy to Arianism
Force, James E., and Richard H. Popkin, eds. Newton and Religion: Context, Nature, and Influence. (1999), pp. xvii, 325.; 13 papers by scholars using newly opened manuscripts
Pfizenmaier, Thomas C. (1997). "Was Isaac Newton an Arian?". Journal of the History of Ideas. 58 (1): 57–80. doi:10.1353/jhi.1997.0001. JSTOR 3653988. S2CID 170545277.
Ramati, Ayval (2001). "The Hidden Truth of Creation: Newton's Method of Fluxions". The British Journal for the History of Science. 34 (4): 417–38. doi:10.1017/S0007087401004484. JSTOR 4028372. S2CID 143045863.
Snobelen, Stephen D. (2001). "'God of Gods, and Lord of Lords': The Theology of Isaac Newton's General Scholium to the Principia". Osiris. 16: 169–208. Bibcode:2001Osir...16..169S. doi:10.1086/649344. JSTOR 301985. S2CID 170364912.
Snobelen, Stephen D. (December 1999). "Isaac Newton, heretic: the strategies of a Nicodemite". The British Journal for the History of Science. 32 (4): 381–419. doi:10.1017/S0007087499003751. JSTOR 4027945. S2CID 145208136.

Science

Bechler, Zev (2013). Contemporary Newtonian Research (Studies in the History of Modern Science)(Volume 9). Springer. ISBN 978-94-009-7717-4.
Berlinski, David. Newton's Gift: How Sir Isaac Newton Unlocked the System of the World. (2000); ISBN 0-684-84392-7
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan (1995). Newton's Principia for the Common Reader. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-851744-3.
Cohen, I. Bernard and Smith, George E., ed. The Cambridge Companion to Newton. (2002). Focuses on philosophical issues only; excerpt and text search; complete edition online "The Cambridge Companion to Newton". Archived from the original on 8 October 2008. Retrieved 13 October 2008.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
Christianson, Gale (1984). In the Presence of the Creator: Isaac Newton & His Times. New York: Free Press. ISBN 978-0-02-905190-0. This well documented work provides, in particular, valuable information regarding Newton's knowledge of Patristics
Cohen, I. B. (1980). The Newtonian Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-22964-7.
Craig, John (1958). "Isaac Newton – Crime Investigator". Nature. 182 (4629): 149–52. Bibcode:1958Natur.182..149C. doi:10.1038/182149a0. S2CID 4200994.
Craig, John (1963). "Isaac Newton and the Counterfeiters". Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London. 18 (2): 136–45. doi:10.1098/rsnr.1963.0017. S2CID 143981415.
Gleick, James (2003). Isaac Newton. Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-42233-1.
Halley, E. (1687). "Review of Newton's Principia". Philosophical Transactions. 186: 291–97.
Hawking, Stephen, ed. On the Shoulders of Giants. ISBN 0-7624-1348-4 Places selections from Newton's Principia in the context of selected writings by Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo and Einstein
Herivel, J. W. (1965). The Background to Newton's Principia. A Study of Newton's Dynamical Researches in the Years 1664–84. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Newton, Isaac. Papers and Letters in Natural Philosophy, edited by I. Bernard Cohen. Harvard University Press, 1958, 1978; ISBN 0-674-46853-8.
Pemberton, H. (1728). "A View of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy". The Physics Teacher. 4 (1): 8–9. Bibcode:1966PhTea...4....8M. doi:10.1119/1.2350900.
Shamos, Morris H. (1959). Great Experiments in Physics. New York: Henry Holt and Company, Inc. ISBN 978-0-486-25346-6.

External links
Listen to this article (36 minutes)
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 30 July 2008 (2008-07-30), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help · More spoken articles)
Enlightening Science digital project Archived 2 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine: Texts of his papers, "Popularisations" and podcasts at the Newton Project
"Archival material relating to Isaac Newton". UK National Archives. 
Portraits of Sir Isaac Newton at the National Portrait Gallery, London 
Writings by Newton
Newton's works – full texts, at the Newton Project Archived 8 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine
Newton's papers in the Royal Society's archives Archived 28 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine
The Newton Manuscripts at the National Library of Israel – the collection of all his religious writings Archived 30 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine
Works by Isaac Newton at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Isaac Newton at Internet Archive
Works by Isaac Newton at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
"Newton Papers" Archived 11 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine – Cambridge Digital Library
vteSir Isaac NewtonPublications
Fluxions (1671)
De Motu (1684)
Principia (1687)
Opticks (1704)
Queries (1704)
Arithmetica (1707)
De Analysi (1711)
Other writings
Quaestiones (1661–1665)
"standing on the shoulders of giants" (1675)
Notes on the Jewish Temple (c. 1680)
"General Scholium" (1713; "hypotheses non fingo" )
Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728)
Corruptions of Scripture (1754)
Contributions
Calculus
fluxion
Impact depth
Inertia
Newton disc
Newton polygon
Newton–Okounkov body
Newton's reflector
Newtonian telescope
Newton scale
Newton's metal
Spectrum
Structural coloration
Newtonianism
Bucket argument
Newton's inequalities
Newton's law of cooling
Newton's law of universal gravitation
post-Newtonian expansion
parameterized
gravitational constant
Newton–Cartan theory
Schrödinger–Newton equation
Newton's laws of motion
Kepler's laws
Newtonian dynamics
Newton's method in optimization
Apollonius's problem
truncated Newton method
Gauss–Newton algorithm
Newton's rings
Newton's theorem about ovals
Newton–Pepys problem
Newtonian potential
Newtonian fluid
Classical mechanics
Corpuscular theory of light
Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy
Newton's notation
Rotating spheres
Newton's cannonball
Newton–Cotes formulas
Newton's method
generalized Gauss–Newton method
Newton fractal
Newton's identities
Newton polynomial
Newton's theorem of revolving orbits
Newton–Euler equations
Newton number
kissing number problem
Newton's quotient
Parallelogram of force
Newton–Puiseux theorem
Absolute space and time
Luminiferous aether
Newtonian series
table
Personal life
Woolsthorpe Manor (birthplace)
Cranbury Park (home)
Early life
Later life
Apple tree
Religious views
Occult studies
Scientific Revolution
Copernican Revolution
Relations
Catherine Barton (niece)
John Conduitt (nephew-in-law)
Isaac Barrow (professor)
William Clarke (mentor)
Benjamin Pulleyn (tutor)
John Keill (disciple)
William Stukeley (friend)
William Jones (friend)
Abraham de Moivre (friend)
Depictions
Newton by Blake (monotype)
Newton by Paolozzi (sculpture)
Isaac Newton Gargoyle
Astronomers Monument
Namesake
Newton (unit)
Newton's cradle
Isaac Newton Institute
Isaac Newton Medal
Isaac Newton Telescope
Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes
XMM-Newton
Sir Isaac Newton Sixth Form
Statal Institute of Higher Education Isaac Newton
Newton International Fellowship
Categories
  Isaac Newton

Articles related to Isaac Newton
vteAge of EnlightenmentTopics
Atheism
Capitalism
Civil liberties
Classicism
Counter-Enlightenment
Critical thinking
Deism
Democracy
Empiricism
Encyclopédistes
Enlightened absolutism
Haskalah
Humanism
Human rights
Individualism
Liberalism
Liberté, égalité, fraternité
Lumières
Methodological skepticism
Midlands
Modernity
Natural philosophy
Objectivity
Progressivism
Rationality
Rationalism
Reason
Reductionism
Sapere aude
Science
Scientific method
Spanish America
Universality
Utopianism
ThinkersEngland
Addison
Ashley-Cooper
Bacon
Bentham
Collins
Gibbon
Godwin
Harrington
Hooke
Johnson
Locke
Milton
Newton
Pope
Price
Priestley
Reynolds
Sidney
Tindal
Wollstonecraft
France
d'Alembert
d'Argenson
Bayle
Beaumarchais
Chamfort
Châtelet
Condillac
Condorcet
Descartes
Diderot
Fontenelle
Gouges
Helvétius
d'Holbach
Jaucourt
La Mettrie
Lavoisier
Leclerc
Mably
Maréchal
Meslier
Montesquieu
Morelly
Pascal
Quesnay
Raynal
Sade
Turgot
Voltaire
Geneva
Abauzit
Bonnet
Burlamaqui
Prévost
Rousseau
Saussure
Germany
Goethe
Herder
Humboldt
Kant
Leibniz
Lessing
Lichtenberg
Mendelssohn
Pufendorf
Schiller
Thomasius
Weishaupt
Wieland
Wolff
Greece
Farmakidis
Feraios
Kairis
Korais
Ireland
Berkeley
Boyle
Burke
Swift
Toland
Italy
Beccaria
Galiani
Galvani
Genovesi
Pagano
Verri
Vico
Netherlands
Bekker
de la Court
Grotius
Huygens
Koerbagh
Leeuwenhoek
Mandeville
Meyer
Nieuwentyt
Spinoza
Swammerdam
Poland
Kołłątaj
Konarski
Krasicki
Niemcewicz
Poniatowski
Śniadecki
Staszic
Wybicki
Portugal
Carvalho e Melo
Romania
Budai-Deleanu
Maior
Micu-Klein
Șincai
Russia
Catherine II
Fonvizin
Kantemir
Kheraskov
Lomonosov
Novikov
Radishchev
Vorontsova-Dashkova
Serbia
Obradović
Mrazović
Spain
Cadalso
Charles III
Feijóo y Montenegro
Moratín
Jovellanos
Villarroel
Scotland
Beattie
Black
Blair
Boswell
Burnett
Burns
Cullen
Ferguson
Hume
Hutcheson
Hutton
Mill
Newton
Playfair
Reid
Smith
Stewart
United States
Franklin
Jefferson
Madison
Mason
Paine

Romanticism →
 Category

vteAlchemy (general)AlchemistsGreco-Egyptian
Agathodaemon (legendary)
Chymes
pseudo-Cleopatra
pseudo-Democritus
Hermes Trismegistus (legendary)
Mary the Jewess
pseudo-Moses
Ostanes (legendary)
Paphnutia the Virgin
Zosimos of Panopolis
Ancient Chinese
Fang (alchemist)
Ge Hong
Master Geng
Wei Boyang
Byzantine
pseudo-Olympiodorus
Stephanus of Alexandria
Synesius
Arabic-Islamic
Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes)
Alphidius
pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās)
Artephius
pseudo-Avicenna
Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs
Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith)
Ibn Waḥshiyya
al-ʿIrāqī
Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber)
pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid)
al-Jildakī
Maslama al-Qurṭubī
al-Ṭughrāʾī
al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis)
Late medieval
pseudo-Albertus
(pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova
pseudo-Geber
George Ripley
Guido di Montanor
Hugh of Evesham
Johann of Laz
John Dastin
John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade)
Magister Salernus
pseudo-Michael Scot
Ortolanus
Paul of Taranto
Petrus Bonus
pseudo-Ramon Llull
(pseudo-)Roger Bacon
Taddeo Alderotti
Thomas Norton
Early modern
Andreas Libavius
Basil Valentine
pseudo-Bernard of Treviso
George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes)
Gerhard Dorn
Giovanni da Correggio
Heinrich Khunrath
Hennig Brand
Isaac Newton
Jakob Böhme
Jan Baptist van Helmont
Johann Rudolf Glauber
John Dee
Michael Maier
Michael Sendivogius
Paracelsus
Pierre-Jean Fabre
Robert Boyle
Samuel Norton
Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes)
Wilhelm Homberg
Modern
Carl Jung
Eugène Canseliet
Frater Albertus
Fulcanelli
Mary Anne Atwood
WritingsMajor Works
Atalanta fugiens
Aurora consurgens
Liber de compositione alchemiae (Morienus)
Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth
Book of Mercy
Books of the Balances
Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit
Cantong Qi
Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz
Clavis sapientiae (Miftāḥ al-ḥikma)
De consideratione quintae essentiae
Emerald Tablet (Tabula Smaragdina)
Leyden papyrus X
Liber Hermetis de alchemia (Liber dabessi)
Liber ignium
Liber lucis
Mappae clavicula
Mirror of Alchimy
Mutus liber
Nabataean Agriculture
Ordinal of Alchemy
Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis
Physika kai mystika
Rosary of the Philosophers
Rutbat al-ḥakīm (Step of the Sage)
Seventy Books
Sirr al-khalīqa (Secret of Creation)
Sirr al-asrār (pseudo-Aristotle)
Sirr al-asrār (al-Rāzī)
Splendor solis
Summa perfectionis
Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air
Turba philosophorum
Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine
Compilations
Aureum vellus
Bibliotheca chemica curiosa
De alchemia
Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum
Fasciculus chemicus
Musaeum Hermeticum
Theatrum chemicum
Theatrum chemicum Britannicum
Tripus aureus
Various
Alembic
Athanor
Azoth
Chrysopoeia
Element
Elixir of life
Homunculus
Iatrochemistry
In art/entertainment
Magnum opus
Ouroboros
Pill of Immortality
Philosophers' stone
Prima materia
Rebis
Takwin
Yliaster
Processes
Substances
Symbols (Unicode, Suns in alchemy)

 All articles

vteLucasian Professors of Mathematics
Isaac Barrow (1664)
Isaac Newton (1669)
William Whiston (1702)
Nicholas Saunderson (1711)
John Colson (1739)
Edward Waring (1760)
Isaac Milner (1798)
Robert Woodhouse (1820)
Thomas Turton (1822)
George Biddell Airy (1826)
Charles Babbage (1828)
Joshua King (1839)
George Stokes (1849)
Joseph Larmor (1903)
Paul Dirac (1932)
James Lighthill (1969)
Stephen Hawking (1979)
Michael Green (2009)
Michael Cates (2015)

vteMasters of the Royal Mint (1331–1879)House of Plantagenet(1216–1399)
Richard de Snowshill/Richard of Grimsby (1331)
Henry de Bruselee and John Chichester (1351–?)
Walter dei Bardi (1361–1361)
John Chichester (1365–1367)
Walter dei Bardi (1375–1391)
John Wildeman (1391–1391)
Houses of Lancaster and York(1399–1485)
Richard Garner (1411–1414)
Sir Lewis John (1413–1414)
Sir Lewis John (1418–1420)
Bartholomew Goldbeter (1421–1432)
John Paddesley (1435–1446)
Robert Manfield (1446–1459)
Sir Richard Tonstall (1459–1461)
William Hastings (1461–April 1483)
Sir Robert Brackenbury (April–June 1483)
Sir Robert Brackenbury (June 1483–1485)
House of Tudor(1485–1603)
Sir Giles Daubeney (1485–1490)
Sir Bartholomew Reed and Robert Fenrother (1492–1498)
4th Baron Mountjoy (1509–1534)
Ralph Rowlet/Sir Martin Bowes (1543)
Sir Martin Bowes (1544)
Sir John York (1547–1553)
Thomas Egerton (1553–1555)
Sir Thomas Stanley (1560–1571)
John Lonyson (1571–1582)
Sir Richard Martin (1582–1603)
House of Stuart(1603–1649)
Sir Richard Martin (1603–1609)
Sir Edward Villiers  (1617–1623)
Sir Randal Cranfield (1623–1626)
Sir Robert Harley (1626–1635)
Sir Ralph Freeman/Sir Thomas Aylesbury (1635–1643)
Sir Robert Harley (1643–1649)
Interregnum(1649–1660)
Aaron Guerdon (1649–1653)
House of Stuart(1660–1714)
Sir Ralph Freeman (1660–1662)
Sir Ralph Freeman/Henry Slingsby (1662–1667)
Henry Slingsby (1667–1680)
Sir John Buckworth/Charles Duncombe/James Hoare (1680–1684)
Thomas Neale/Charles Duncombe/James Hoare (1684–1686)
Thomas Neale (1686–1699)
Sir Isaac Newton (1700–1714)
House of Hanover(1714–1901)
Sir Isaac Newton (1714–1727)
John Conduitt (1727–1737)
Hon. Richard Arundell (1737–1745)
3rd Viscount Chetwynd (1745–1769)
1st Earl Cadogan (1769–1784)
3rd Earl of Effingham (1784–1789)
5th Earl of Chesterfield (1789–1790)
2nd Marquess Townshend (1790–1794)
Sir George Yonge (1794–1799)
2nd Earl of Liverpool (1799–1801)
2nd Baron Arden (1801–1802)
John Smyth (1802–1804)
3rd Earl Bathurst (1804–1806)
Lord Charles Spencer (1806)
Charles Bathurst (1806–1807)
3rd Earl Bathurst (1807–1812)
2nd Earl of Clancarty (1812–1814)
3rd Earl of Mornington (1814–1823)
1st Baron Wallace (1823–1827)
George Tierney (1827–1828)
John Charles Herries (1828–1830)
1st Earl of Auckland (1830–1834)
1st Baron Dunfermline (1834–1835)
1st Baron Ashburton (1835)
1st Baron Taunton (1835–1841)
William Ewart Gladstone (1841–1845)
Sir George Clerk (1845–1846)
Richard Lalor Sheil (1846–1850)
Sir John Herschel (1850–1855)
Thomas Graham (1855–1869)
Vacant (1869–1879)
Office abolished in 1879 with duties given to the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
vteMetaphysicsTheories
Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Spiritualism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Theory of forms
Truthmaker theory
Type theory
Concepts
Abstract object
Anima mundi
Category of being
Causality
Causal closure
Cogito, ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Nature
Necessity
Object
Ontology
Pattern
Perception
Physical object
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Relation
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...
Metaphysicians
Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Proclus
Plotinus
Scotus
Aquinas
Suárez
Descartes
Spinoza
Locke
Malebranche
Newton
Leibniz
Wolff
Reid
Berkeley
Hume
Kant
Hegel
Schopenhauer
Bolzano
Lotze
Peirce
Nietzsche
Meinong
Bergson
Whitehead
Russell
Moore
Collingwood
Wittgenstein
Heidegger
Carnap
Ryle
Sartre
Quine
Davidson
Strawson
Anscombe
Deleuze
Dummett
Armstrong
Putnam
Plantinga
Kripke
Lewis
Parfit
more ...
Notable works
Sophist (c. 350 BC)
Timaeus (c. 350 BC)
Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC)
De rerum natura (c. 80 BC)
Metaphysics (c. 50)
Enneads (c. 270)
Daneshnameh-ye Alai (c. 1000)
Meditations on First Philosophy (1641)
Ethics (1677)
A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710)
Monadology (1714)
Critique of Pure Reason (1781)
Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783)
The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807)
The World as Will and Representation (1818)
Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846)
Being and Time (1927)
Being and Nothingness (1943)
Simulacra and Simulation (1981)
Related topics
Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Feminist metaphysics
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Mereology
Meta-
Phenomenology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology

 Category
 Philosophy portal

vtePhilosophy of scienceConcepts
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
A priori and a posteriori
Causality
Commensurability
Consilience
Construct
Creative synthesis
Demarcation problem
Empirical evidence
Explanatory power
Fact
Falsifiability
Feminist method
Functional contextualism
Ignoramus et ignorabimus
Inductive reasoning
Intertheoretic reduction
Inquiry
Nature
Objectivity
Observation
Paradigm
Problem of induction
Scientific evidence
Evidence-based practice
Scientific law
Scientific method
Scientific pluralism
Scientific Revolution
Scientific theory
Testability
Theory choice
Theory-ladenness
Underdetermination
Unity of science
more...
Theories
Coherentism
Confirmation holism
Constructive empiricism
Constructive realism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Conventionalism
Deductive-nomological model
Epistemological anarchism
Evolutionism
Fallibilism
Foundationalism
Hypothetico-deductive model
Inductionism
Instrumentalism
Model-dependent realism
Naturalism
Physicalism
Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism
Pragmatism
Rationalism / Empiricism
Received view / Semantic view of theories
Scientific essentialism
Scientific formalism
Scientific realism / Anti-realism
Scientific skepticism
Scientism
Structuralism
Uniformitarianism
Vitalism
Philosophy of...
Biology
Chemistry
Physics
Space and time
Social science
Archaeology
Economics‎
Geography
History
Linguistics
Psychology
Related topics
Criticism of science
Descriptive science
Epistemology
Faith and rationality
Hard and soft science
History and philosophy of science
Normative science
Protoscience
Pseudoscience
Relationship between religion and science
Rhetoric of science
Science studies
Sociology of scientific ignorance
Sociology of scientific knowledge
Philosophers of sciencePrecursors
Roger Bacon
Francis Bacon
Galileo Galilei
Isaac Newton
David Hume

Auguste Comte
Henri Poincaré
Pierre Duhem
Rudolf Steiner
Karl Pearson
Charles Sanders Peirce
Wilhelm Windelband
Alfred North Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Otto Neurath
C. D. Broad
Michael Polanyi
Hans Reichenbach
Rudolf Carnap
Karl Popper
Carl Gustav Hempel
W. V. O. Quine
Thomas Kuhn
Imre Lakatos
Paul Feyerabend
Ian Hacking
Bas van Fraassen
Larry Laudan
Category
 Philosophy portal
 Science portal

vtePresidents of the Royal Society17th century
Viscount Brouncker (1662)
Joseph Williamson (1677)
Christopher Wren (1680)
John Hoskyns (1682)
Cyril Wyche (1683)
Samuel Pepys (1684)
Earl of Carbery (1686)
Earl of Pembroke (1689)
Robert Southwell (1690)
Charles Montagu (1695)
Lord Somers (1698)
18th century
Isaac Newton (1703)
Hans Sloane (1727)
Martin Folkes (1741)
Earl of Macclesfield (1752)
Earl of Morton (1764)
James Burrow (1768)
James West (1768)
James Burrow (1772)
John Pringle (1772)
Joseph Banks (1778)
19th century
William Hyde Wollaston (1820)
Humphry Davy (1820)
Davies Gilbert (1827)
Duke of Sussex (1830)
Marquess of Northampton (1838)
Earl of Rosse (1848)
Lord Wrottesley (1854)
Benjamin Collins Brodie (1858)
Edward Sabine (1861)
George Biddell Airy (1871)
Joseph Dalton Hooker (1873)
William Spottiswoode (1878)
Thomas Henry Huxley (1883)
George Gabriel Stokes (1885)
Lord Kelvin (1890)
Joseph Lister (1895)
20th century
William Huggins (1900)
Lord Rayleigh (1905)
Archibald Geikie (1908)
William Crookes (1913)
J. J. Thomson (1915)
Charles Scott Sherrington (1920)
Ernest Rutherford (1925)
Frederick Gowland Hopkins (1930)
William Henry Bragg (1935)
Henry Hallett Dale (1940)
Robert Robinson (1945)
Lord Adrian (1950)
Cyril Norman Hinshelwood (1955)
Howard Florey (1960)
Patrick Blackett (1965)
Alan Lloyd Hodgkin (1970)
Lord Todd (1975)
Andrew Huxley (1980)
George Porter (1985)
Sir Michael Atiyah (1990)
Sir Aaron Klug (1995)
21st century
Lord May (2000)
Lord Rees (2005)
Sir Paul Nurse (2010)
Venki Ramakrishnan (2015)
Adrian Smith (2020)

vteScientists whose names are used as unitsSI base units
André-Marie Ampère (ampere)
Lord Kelvin (kelvin)
SI derived units
Henri Becquerel (becquerel)
Anders Celsius (degree Celsius)
Charles-Augustin de Coulomb (coulomb)
Michael Faraday (farad)
Louis Harold Gray (gray)
Joseph Henry (henry)
Heinrich Hertz (hertz)
James Prescott Joule (joule)
Isaac Newton (newton)
Georg Ohm (ohm)
Blaise Pascal (pascal)
Werner von Siemens (siemens)
Rolf Maximilian Sievert (sievert)
Nikola Tesla (tesla)
Alessandro Volta (volt)
James Watt (watt)
Wilhelm Eduard Weber (weber)
Non-SI metric (cgs) units
Anders Jonas Ångström (angstrom)
Peter Debye (debye)
Loránd Eötvös (eotvos)
Galileo Galilei (gal)
Carl Friedrich Gauss (gauss)
William Gilbert (gilbert)
Heinrich Kayser (kayser)
Johann Heinrich Lambert (lambert)
Samuel Langley (langley)
James Clerk Maxwell (maxwell)
Hans Christian Ørsted (oersted)
Jean Léonard Marie Poiseuille (poise)
Sir George Stokes, 1st Baronet (stokes)
John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh (rayl)
Imperial and US customary units
Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit (degree Fahrenheit)
Johann Heinrich Lambert (foot-lambert)
William John Macquorn Rankine (degree Rankine)
Non-systematic units
Alexander Graham Bell (bel)
Marie Curie (curie)
Pierre Curie (curie)
John Dalton (dalton)
Michael Faraday (faraday)
Heinrich Mache (Mache)
John Napier (neper)
René Antoine Ferchault de Réaumur (degree Réaumur)
Wilhelm Röntgen (roentgen)
J. J. Thomson (thomson)
Evangelista Torricelli (torr)
List of scientists whose names are used as units · Scientists whose names are used in physical constants · People whose names are used in chemical element names
Offices and positions held by Isaac Newton


Academic offices


Preceded byIsaac Barrow

 Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge 1669–1702

Succeeded byWilliam Whiston


Preceded byThe Lord Somers

 President of the Royal Society 1703–1727

Succeeded byHans Sloane


Parliament of England


Preceded byRobert Brady

 Member of Parliament for Cambridge University 1689–1690        With:  Robert Sawyer 

Succeeded byEdward Finch


Preceded byAnthony Hammond

 Member of Parliament for Cambridge University 1701–1702        With:  The Lord Carleton 

Succeeded byThe Earl of Anglesey


Government offices


Preceded byBenjamin Overton

 Warden of the Mint 1696–1700

Succeeded byJohn Stanley


Preceded byThomas Neale

 Master of the Mint 1700–1727

Succeeded byJohn Conduitt


Portals: Mathematics Physics History of science Astronomy Stars Solar SystemIsaac Newton at Wikipedia's sister projects:Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksData from Wikidata
Authority control databases International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Taiwan
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Russia
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Google Scholar
MathSciNet
Mathematics Genealogy Project
zbMATH
Artists
ULAN
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
Other
SNAC
2
3
IdRef
Te Papa (New Zealand)





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Isaac_Newton&oldid=1228344161"
Categories: Isaac Newton1642 births1727 deaths17th-century alchemists17th-century apocalypticists17th-century English astronomers17th-century English mathematicians17th-century English male writers17th-century English writers17th-century writers in Latin18th-century alchemists18th-century apocalypticists18th-century British astronomers18th-century British scientists18th-century English mathematicians18th-century English male writers18th-century English writers18th-century writers in LatinAlumni of Trinity College, CambridgeAntitrinitariansBallistics expertsBritish scientific instrument makersBritish writers in LatinBurials at Westminster AbbeyColor scientistsCopernican RevolutionCreators of temperature scalesBritish critics of atheismEnglish alchemistsEnglish AnglicansEnglish ChristiansEnglish inventorsEnglish justices of the peaceEnglish knightsEnglish mathematiciansEnglish MPs 1689–1690English MPs 1701–1702English physicistsEnlightenment scientistsExperimental physicistsFellows of the Royal SocietyFellows of Trinity College, CambridgeFluid dynamicistsBritish geometersLinear algebraistsHermeticistsHistory of calculusKnights BachelorLucasian Professors of MathematicsMasters of the MintMembers of the pre-1707 Parliament of England for the University of CambridgeNatural philosophersNontrinitarian ChristiansOptical physicistsPeople educated at The King's School, GranthamPeople from South Kesteven DistrictPhilosophers of sciencePost-Reformation Arian ChristiansPresidents of the Royal SocietyReputed virginsTheoretical physicistsWriters about religion and scienceHidden categories: All articles with self-published sourcesArticles with self-published sources from January 2023Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2014Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksCS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataGood articlesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesEngvarB from January 2024Use dmy dates from January 2024Biography with signatureArticles with hCardsArticles containing Latin-language textAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2018All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2018Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknownArticles prone to spam from December 2018Articles with hAudio microformatsSpoken articlesArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksArticles containing French-language textArticles containing Hebrew-language textPages using Sister project links with hidden wikidataArticles with FAST identifiersArticles with ISNI identifiersArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WorldCat Entities identifiersArticles with BIBSYS identifiersArticles with BNC identifiersArticles with BNE identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNFdata identifiersArticles with BNMM identifiersArticles with CANTICN identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with ICCU identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with KBR identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with Libris identifiersArticles with LNB identifiersArticles with NCL identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with NLA identifiersArticles with NLG identifiersArticles with NLK identifiersArticles with NSK identifiersArticles with NTA identifiersArticles with PLWABN identifiersArticles with PortugalA identifiersArticles with RSL identifiersArticles with VcBA identifiersArticles with CINII identifiersArticles with Google Scholar identifiersArticles with MATHSN identifiersArticles with MGP identifiersArticles with ZBMATH identifiersArticles with ULAN identifiersArticles with DTBIO identifiersArticles with Trove identifiersArticles with SNAC-ID identifiersArticles with SUDOC identifiersArticles with TePapa identifiers






 This page was last edited on 10 June 2024, at 18:53 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view













Toggle limited content width







