













James Clerk Maxwell - Physics, Electromagnetism, Theory | Britannica
















































Search Britannica





Click here to search












Search Britannica





Click here to search










   Subscribe


Login










Home
Games & Quizzes
History & Society
Science & Tech
Biographies
Animals & Nature
Geography & Travel
Arts & Culture
Money
Videos
On This Day
One Good Fact
Dictionary
New Articles

History & Society

Lifestyles & Social Issues
Philosophy & Religion
Politics, Law & Government
World History

Science & Tech

Health & Medicine
Science
Technology

Biographies

Browse Biographies

Animals & Nature

Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates
Bugs, Mollusks & Other Invertebrates
Environment
Fossils & Geologic Time
Mammals
Plants

Geography & Travel

Geography & Travel

Arts & Culture

Entertainment & Pop Culture
Literature
Sports & Recreation
Visual Arts


Companions
Demystified
Image Galleries
Infographics
Lists
Podcasts
Spotlights
Summaries
The Forum
Top Questions
#WTFact


100 Women
Britannica Kids
Saving Earth
Space Next 50
Student Center










				Home
				Games & Quizzes
				History & Society
				Science & Tech
				Biographies
				Animals & Nature
				Geography & Travel
				Arts & Culture
				Money
				Videos

























				James Clerk Maxwell








                    Table of Contents
                
Introduction & Top QuestionsEarly lifeLater life

				References & Edit History

				Quick Facts & Related Topics



				Images & Videos

























                        For Students
                    







James Clerk Maxwell summary





                        Quizzes
                    







Faces of Science









Physics and Natural Law









More Art and Colors Quiz





                        Related Questions
                    


				How did James Clerk Maxwell die?

				How far is Saturn from Earth?

				What is Saturn's largest moon?

				Why is light important for life on Earth?

				Why does physics work in SI units?




                        Read Next
                    







Is Light Pollution Really Pollution?









What's the Difference Between Speed and Velocity?









Why Is Pluto No Longer a Planet?









A Model of the Cosmos









How Is Light Both a Particle and a Wave?





                        Discover
                    







What’s the Difference Between Asian and African Elephants?









Why Do Bananas Turn Brown?









7 Deadliest Weapons in History









6 Animals That Eat Their Mates









Estimated Battle Casualties During the Normandy Invasion on June 6, 1944









The Top COVID-19 Vaccine Myths Spreading Online









6 of the First Women to Become Heads of State





















	
			Contents
		









Home



				Science



				Physics



				Physicists





Later life of James Clerk MaxwellIn 1865 Maxwell resigned his professorship at King’s College and retired to the family estate in Glenlair. He continued to visit London every spring and served as external examiner for the Mathematical Tripos (exams) at Cambridge. In the spring and early summer of 1867 he toured Italy. But most of his energy during this period was devoted to writing his famous treatise on electricity and magnetism. It was Maxwell’s research on electromagnetism that established him among the great scientists of history. In the preface to his Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (1873), the best exposition of his theory, Maxwell stated that his major task was to convert Faraday’s physical ideas into mathematical form. In attempting to illustrate Faraday’s law of induction (that a changing magnetic field gives rise to an induced electromagnetic field), Maxwell constructed a mechanical model. He found that the model gave rise to a corresponding “displacement current” in the dielectric medium, which could then be the seat of transverse waves. On calculating the velocity of these waves, he found that they were very close to the velocity of light. Maxwell concluded that he could “scarcely avoid the inference that light consists in the transverse undulations of the same medium which is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena.” Maxwell’s theory suggested that electromagnetic waves could be generated in a laboratory, a possibility first demonstrated by Heinrich Hertz in 1887, eight years after Maxwell’s death. The resulting radio industry with its many applications thus has its origin in Maxwell’s publications. In addition to his electromagnetic theory, Maxwell made major contributions to other areas of physics. While still in his 20s, he demonstrated his mastery of classical physics by writing a prizewinning essay on Saturn’s rings, in which he concluded that the rings must consist of masses of matter not mutually coherent—a conclusion that was corroborated more than 100 years later by the first Voyager space probe to reach Saturn. The Maxwell relations of equality between different partial derivatives of thermodynamic functions are included in every standard textbook on thermodynamics. Though Maxwell did not originate the modern kinetic theory of gases, he was the first to apply the methods of probability and statistics in describing the properties of an assembly of molecules. Thus he was able to demonstrate that the velocities of molecules in a gas, previously assumed to be equal, must follow a statistical distribution (known subsequently as the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution law). In later papers Maxwell investigated the transport properties of gases—i.e., the effect of changes in temperature and pressure on viscosity, thermal conductivity, and diffusion. Maxwell was far from being an abstruse theoretician. He was skillful in the design of experimental apparatus, as was shown early in his career during his investigations of colour vision. He devised a colour top with adjustable sectors of tinted paper to test the three-colour hypothesis of Thomas Young and later invented a colour box that made it possible to conduct experiments with spectral colours rather than pigments. His investigations of the colour theory led him to conclude that a colour photograph could be produced by photographing through filters of the three primary colours and then recombining the images. He demonstrated his supposition in a lecture to the Royal Institution of Great Britain in 1861 by projecting through filters a colour photograph of a tartan ribbon that had been taken by this method. In addition to these well-known contributions, a number of ideas that Maxwell put forward quite casually have since led to developments of great significance. The hypothetical intelligent being known as Maxwell’s demon was a factor in the development of information theory. Maxwell’s analytic treatment of speed governors is generally regarded as the founding paper on cybernetics, and his “equal areas” construction provided an essential constituent of the theory of fluids developed by Johannes Diederik van der Waals. His work in geometrical optics led to the discovery of the fish-eye lens. From the start of his career to its finish, his papers are filled with novelty and interest. He also was a contributor to the ninth edition of Encyclopædia Britannica. In 1871 Maxwell was elected to the new Cavendish professorship at Cambridge. He set about designing the Cavendish Laboratory and supervised its construction. Maxwell had few students, but they were of the highest calibre and included William D. Niven, John Ambrose (later Sir John Ambrose) Fleming, Richard Tetley Glazebrook, John Henry Poynting, and Arthur Schuster. During the Easter term of 1879 Maxwell took ill on several occasions; he returned to Glenlair in June, but his condition did not improve. He died on November 5, after a short illness. Maxwell received no public honours and was buried quietly in a small churchyard in the village of Parton, in Scotland. Cyril Domb The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica















 













