



James Clerk Maxwell | Biography & Discoveries | Study.com













































for Teachers
for Schools
for Working Scholars®
for College Credit


























Log In


Sign Up

Menu
					










									Plans
							



									Subjects
							





Art


Business


Computer Science


Education & Teaching


English


Health & Medicine


History


Humanities


Math


Psychology


Science


Social Science







							 
						



									Art
							



									Architecture 




									Art History 




									Design 




									Performing Arts 




									Visual Arts 






							 
						



									Business
							



									Accounting 




									Business Administration 




									Business Communication 




									Business Ethics 




									Business Intelligence 




									Business Law 




									Economics 




									Finance 




									Healthcare Administration 




									Human Resources 




									Information Technology 




									International Business 




									Operations Management 




									Real Estate 




									Sales & Marketing 






							 
						



									Computer Science
							



									Computer Engineering 




									Computer Programming 




									Cybersecurity 




									Data Science 




									Software 






							 
						



									Education & Teaching
							



									Education Law & Policy 




									Pedagogy & Teaching Strategies 




									Special & Specialized Education 




									Student Support in Education 




									Teaching English Language Learners 






							 
						



									English
							



									Grammar 




									Literature 




									Public Speaking 




									Reading 




									Vocabulary 




									Writing & Composition 






							 
						



									Health & Medicine
							



									Counseling & Therapy 




									Health 




									Medicine 




									Nursing 




									Nutrition 






							 
						



									History
							



									US History 




									World History 






							 
						



									Humanities
							



									Communication 




									Ethics 




									Foreign Languages 




									Philosophy 




									Religious Studies 






							 
						



									Math
							



									Algebra 




									Basic Math 




									Calculus 




									Geometry 




									Statistics 




									Trigonometry 






							 
						



									Psychology
							



									Clinical & Abnormal Psychology 




									Cognitive Science 




									Developmental Psychology 




									Educational Psychology 




									Organizational Psychology 




									Social Psychology 






							 
						



									Science
							



									Anatomy & Physiology 




									Astronomy 




									Biology 




									Chemistry 




									Earth Science 




									Engineering 




									Environmental Science 




									Physics 






							 
						



									Social Science
							



									Anthropology 




									Criminal Justice 




									Geography 




									Law 




									Linguistics 




									Political Science 




									Sociology 







									Courses
							





By Subject


By Education Level


Adult Education


Transferable Credit







							By Subject
						



									Arts 




									Business 




									Computer Science 




									Education & Teaching 




									English (ELA) 




									Foreign Language 




									Health & Medicine 




									History 




									Humanities 




									Math 




									Psychology 




									Science 




									Social Science 






							By Education Level
						



									Elementary School 




									Middle School 




									High School 




									College 




									Graduate and Post-Grad 







									Test Prep
							





Teacher Certification Exams


Nursing Exams


Allied Health & Medicine Exams


Real Estate Exams


All Test Prep







							 
						



									Teacher Certification Exams
							



									Praxis 




									FTCE 




									TExES 




									CSET & CBEST 




									More Teacher Certification Test Prep 






							 
						



									Nursing Exams
							



									NCLEX 




									HESI 




									More Nursing Test Prep 






							 
						



									Allied Health & Medicine Exams
							



									ASCP 




									CNA 




									CNS 




									More Medical Test Prep 






							 
						



									Real Estate Exams
							



									Real Estate Sales 




									Real Estate Brokers 




									Real Estate Appraisals 







									Teach
							





Teaching Resources and Curriculum


Skills Practice


Lesson Plans


Teacher Certification


Teacher Professional Development








									Tutoring
							





Math Tutoring


Science Tutoring


Business Tutoring


Humanities Tutoring







							 
						



									Math Tutoring
							



									Algebra  Tutoring




									Calculus  Tutoring




									Geometry  Tutoring




									Pre-calculus  Tutoring




									Statistics  Tutoring




									Trigonometry  Tutoring






							 
						



									Science Tutoring
							



									Biology  Tutoring




									Chemistry  Tutoring




									Physics  Tutoring






							 
						



									Business Tutoring
							



									Accounting  Tutoring




									Economics  Tutoring




									Finance  Tutoring






							 
						



									Humanities Tutoring
							



									History  Tutoring




									Literature  Tutoring




									Writing  Tutoring






Sign Up

























Copyright










 Science Courses
			
			/
			
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	

	
	
	
		
		
		
		
		
			
Significant Physicists Study Guide
Course




		James Clerk Maxwell | Biography & Discoveries
	






Lesson



						
							
								Additional Info
							
							
						
					




					Nicholas Amendolare, Michael Blosser
			


Author

Nicholas Amendolare
Nicholas Amendolare is a high school and middle school science teacher from Plymouth, Massachusetts. He has a bachelor's degree in environmental science from Worcester Polytechnic Institute and a master's degree in education from Harvard University. He has been a teacher for nine years, has written for TED-Ed, and is the founder of www.MrAscience.com.

					View bio
				


Instructor

Michael Blosser
Michael has a Masters in Physics and a Masters in International Development. He has over 5 years of teaching experience, teaching Physics, Math, and English classes.

					View bio
				



							Read about James Clerk Maxwell and his legacy. Learn about Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory and other scientific discoveries related to him. See quotes by Maxwell.
						
								
									Updated: 11/21/2023
								







Frequently Asked Questions



What was James Clerk Maxwell's theory?

James Clerk Maxwell's most famous theory was that of electromagnetism. The theory stated what light was simply electromagnetic radiation, and that the human eye could detect only a small fraction of the electromagnetic spectrum.



Who is James Clerk Maxwell and what did he discover?

James Clerk Maxwell was a 19th-century scientist who made discoveries that unified the fields of optics, magnetism, and electricity. In short, Maxwell discovered that light was simply a type of electromagnetic radiation.












		Create an account
		




Table of ContentsWho Was James Clerk Maxwell? Biography of James Clerk Maxwell The Accomplishments of James Clerk Maxwell James Clerk Maxwell Quotes and Legacy Lesson SummaryShow 






Who Was James Clerk Maxwell?



James Clerk Maxwell was a 19th-century scientist who is most famous for his electromagnetic theory. In short, Maxwell discovered that the worlds of optics, magnetism, and electricity were inextricably linked. Visible light is simply a form of electromagnetic radiation that the human eye can detect. And there are also several invisible forms of electromagnetic radiation, including radio waves, microwaves, infrared light, ultraviolet light, X-rays, and gamma rays. Maxwell's groundbreaking 1865 paper, titled "A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field," fundamentally changed the world of physics. His linking of magnetism and electricity has been called the "second great unification in physics," following only Sir Isaac Newton's linking of gravity and astronomy almost two-hundred years before.

An 1890 portrait of James Clerk Maxwell.













								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account













									Lesson
							



									Quiz
								



									Course
								



						














	
	
							13K
							views







Biography of James Clerk Maxwell



James Clerk Maxwell was born into an upper-class family in southwestern Scotland in 1831. He grew up on a 1500-acre estate, son to John Clerk Maxwell and Frances Cay. James grew up as an only child; his older sister Elizabeth died in infancy. From an early age, James is said to have been intelligent and extremely inquisitive. In a letter to his aunt, Frances described his curiosity in depth: "'Show me how it doos' is never out of his mouth. He also investigates the hidden course of streams and bell-wires, the way the water gets from the pond through the wall…He drags papa all over to show him the holes where the wires go through."From an early age, James's mother was his teacher. But when she died of abdominal cancer in 1839, the role was taken over by his father and his Aunt Jane. In 1842, James's father took him to see an exhibition by Scottish inventor Robert Davidson where he showed the crowd a demonstration of magnetic force and electric propulsion. Little did Davidson know that somewhere in the crowd there was a ten-year-old boy who would later change the world.Education and Personal LifeMaxwell began his formal schooling at the famous Edinburgh Academy, where he showed he was a gifted student, eventually winning awards in mathematics, English, and poetry. At the age of 16, Maxwell began studying at the University of Edinburgh. Because he found the university classes too easy, he immersed himself in independent research. In particular, he studied the characteristics of polarized light, which led him to publish a paper called "On the Equilibrium of Elastic Solids" at the age of 18.
In 1850, Maxwell moved to England to study at the University of Cambridge. During his time at the university, Maxwell mainly focused on mathematics, earning his degree in 1854. Two years later, a 25-year-old Maxwell took a job at Marischal College in Aberdeen, becoming their youngest-ever professor. His first topic of research in his new position was related to the composition of Saturn's rings. After two years of research, Maxwell concluded that a complete solid ring as well as a fluid ring would both be unstable. Thus he concluded that the rings must be made of small, solid particles, each orbiting Saturn independently, a theory that was well ahead of its time. His time at Marischal also led him to cross paths with Katherine Mary Dewar, the principal's daughter. The two were married in 1858.Career as a ScientistIn 1860, Maxwell took a position at King's College in London. The period became one of the most prolific in Maxwell's life. During his time in London, he invented the world's first light-fast color photograph, he made discoveries regarding the viscosity of gases, and he made significant headway in linking the worlds of electricity and magnetism. After leaving his job at King's College, he published a paper in 1868 describing the behavior of governors in steam engines. Two years later, he published a paper called "On Reciprocal Figures, Frames and Diagrams of Forces." And in the early 1870s he wrote two textbooks, one called Theory of Heat and the other called Matter and Motion.But his most famous discoveries were in the middle 1860s. It began with his discovery that electromagnetic waves seemed to propagate at the speed of light, which Maxwell thought could not be a coincidence. In 1862, he wrote the words "We can scarcely avoid the conclusion that light consists in the transverse undulations of the same medium which is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena." This was a truly visionary commentary which foreshadowed his future discoveries.

A postcard from Maxwell to Peter Tait describing some of his equations.






In 1865, he published his most famous paper, "A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field." In it, he further cemented his position that light and magnetism are essentially the same substance. Several years later, he put the finished touches on his great discovery, which included the twenty mathematical equations that are now referred to as "Maxwell's Equations." These were published in his textbook, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism in 1873.Final YearsBy April, 1879, Maxwell began showing signs of illness. What began as simply trouble swallowing eventually gave way to more severe illness. Maxwell died of abdominal cancer on November 5th, 1879, the very same disease that took the life of his mother. His life and career were cut drastically short. He was only 48 years old.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account















The Accomplishments of James Clerk Maxwell



Maxwell's life and accomplishments could perhaps best be described as prolific. He made discoveries linking the worlds of optics, magnetism, and electricity. However he also made discoveries in mathematics, astronomy, and many other fields. Perhaps Albert Einstein said it best, describing Maxwell's work as "the most profound and the most fruitful that physics has experienced since the time of Newton."
Electromagnetic TheoryBefore Maxwell, the worlds of optics, electricity, and magnetism were all considered separate fields of scientific study. Optics was the study of visible light. Electricity was a new substance that could flow through wires and power machinery. Magnetism was a mystical, invisible force that could push or pull without touching. However throughout his work, and in particular with his 1865 paper "A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field" and the publication of his equations, Maxwell showed that optics, electricity, and magnetism were somehow three sides of the same coin. Electricity, which we now understand as the motion of electrons, can produce changes in electromagnetic fields. Likewise when these changes happen in waves, they propagate outward as electromagnetic radiation. Electromagnetic radiation is, in other words, light.Human Perception of ColorHowever we now know that all light can be detected by the human eye. The world of optics is the study of visible light, that is, a type of electromagnetic radiation of a certain wavelength and frequency that the human eye can detect. The lowest frequency is red, followed by orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet. Beyond violet, the waves have a frequency that is beyond detection for humans. Although, it is important to note that this range of frequencies and the classification of colors is a distinctly human phenomenon. For example, some snakes can see infrared light, which is invisible to humans. There are some birds that can detect ultraviolet light as well.Maxwell's work followed in the footsteps of scientists like Sir Isaac Newton, the first to discover that white light was actually a summation of many distinct colors.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







James Clerk Maxwell Quotes and Legacy



In 1999, a survey of a hundred of the world's best modern physicists ranked James Clerk Maxwell the third-greatest of all time. He followed behind only Albert Einstein and Sir Isaac Newton. In addition to his groundbreaking discovery in electromagnetics, one of the things that makes Maxwell truly great is the diversity of his work. It was the same curiosity that he displayed as a child that led Maxwell on a life of great questions and greater discovery. "Now my great plan, which was conceived of old, . . . is to let nothing be willfully left unexamined," he once said.
However his greatest legacy was setting the stage for a revolution in 20th-century physics, one that was led by Albert Einstein. In his famous 1865 paper, Maxwell wrote, "The agreement of the results seems to show that light and magnetism are affections of the same substance, and that light is an electromagnetic disturbance propagated through the field according to electromagnetic laws." This discovery allowed Einstein to begin his work on relativity and the photoelectric effect. In fact, when Einstein visited Maxwell's former home, the University of Cambridge, in 1922, his friend remarked that he accomplished great things because he stands on the shoulders of Sir Isaac Newton. Contrarily Einstein shot back, "No I don't. I stand on the shoulders of Maxwell."






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Lesson Summary



James Clerk Maxwell was a 19th-century scientist who is most famous for his electromagnetic theory. In short, Maxwell discovered that the worlds of optics, magnetism, and electricity were inextricably linked. His linking of magnetism and electricity has been called the "second great unification in physics," following only Sir Isaac Newton's linking of gravity and astronomy almost two-hundred years before.
Maxwell was born into an upper-class family in Scotland in 1831. He was educated first at Edinburgh Academy, then later at the University of Edinburgh and the University of Cambridge. Upon graduating, Maxwell began his career as a scientist and mathematician, making great discoveries in math, optics, thermodynamics, and several other fields. However his most famous discovery came in the 1860s. It began with his discovery that electromagnetic waves seemed to propagate at the speed of light, continued with his 1865 paper, "A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field," and finished with his publication with twenty mathematical equations which provide a mathematical model for electricity, optics, and magnetism. Today, they are simply referred to as "Maxwell's Equations."






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account










														
														Additional Info
													



James Clerk MaxwellIn science, it is when we take some interest in the great discoverers and their lives that it becomes endurable, and only when we begin to trace the development of ideas that it becomes fascinating. - James Clerk Maxwell 

   James Clerk Maxwell 
 





James Clerk Maxwell is compared with the likes of Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein. Maxwell is largely credited with being one of the most influential physicists ever. He is famous for his theory of electromagnetism. This lesson will explore the personal life and career of James Clerk Maxwell and identify the scientific contributions that have made him a household name. 
Childhood and Early LifeJames Clerk Maxwell was born on June 13, 1831, in Edinburgh, Scotland, to parents John Clerk and Frances Cay. John Clerk was a practicing lawyer. Frances Cay died from cancer when Maxwell was only eight years old. Maxwell's family was fairly well off and invested a lot in his education. He had a private tutor from a very young age and enrolled in Edinburgh Academy for high school. Like his family, Maxwell was a strict Protestant who took his faith very seriously, and like the famous physicist Isaac Newton, he didn't see any conflict with his faith and scientific work. Maxwell showed his genius at a very early age. He enrolled at the University of Edinburgh at age of 16. Even though Maxwell was still a teenager, his mathematical and scientific abilities were astounding. He published many papers in scientific journals while attending university. In 1850, Maxwell moved his academic career to the prestigious Cambridge University. He graduated with a degree in mathematics four years later. In 1856, Maxwell was given Edinburgh's highest award in mathematics and, that same year, was appointed the chair of natural philosophy (what they called the study of physics at that time) at the University of Aberdeen at the young age of 25. In 1858, James Maxwell married Katherine Mary Dewar, who occasionally helped him with his experiments. They had no children together, but were said to have had a very loving and devoted relationship.  Career and Scientific ContributionsWhat, then, is light according to the electromagnetic theory? It consists of alternate and opposite rapidly recurring transverse magnetic disturbances, accompanied with electric displacements, the direction of the electric displacement being at the right angles to the magnetic disturbance, and both at right angles to the direction of the ray. - James Clerk Maxwell Maxwell made significant contributions to the scientific community. While a professor at the University of Aberdeen, Maxwell postulated a theory about the rings of the planet Saturn, proposing that the rings of Saturn were stable because they were composed of tiny particles, a theory that was later confirmed by 20th century space probes. In 1858, Maxwell took a professorship position at King College in London; it was there that Maxwell produced the world's first color photo in 1861. However, James Maxwell's most significant contributions to the scientific community were still to come. Researching the pivotal work on electricity and magnetism done by physicists André-Marie Ampère and Michael Faraday, Maxwell shocked the physics world by unifying electricity, magnetism, and light and postulating that they were all were the same type of physical phenomena: electromagnetic waves, or radiation (used interchangeably). Electromagnetic waves are waves that propagate or radiate amongst the electromagnetic field. Some examples of electromagnetic waves include visible light, x-rays, radio waves, gamma rays, and ultraviolet rays. Maxwell published the revolutionary theory of electromagnetism along with his famous Maxwell equations in the paper Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field in 1864. Maxwell equations combine electricity and magnetism using advanced calculus and are usually not taught until upper level physics courses. These equations are shown below.  





 





 





 





 Maxwell's equations have been praised as the second most important unification in the field of physics after Isaac Newton's equations. 


 Later Life and DeathJames Maxwell followed up his revolutionary theory of electromagnetism by publishing another paper in 1874 called A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, which followed up and went into greater detail about his electromagnetic research and theories. Maxwell also worked with physicist Ludwig Boltzmann on the kinetic theory of gases. Boltzmann used this work to create the Maxwell-Boltzmann equations, which were published after Maxwell's death. These equations explain the distribution of a particle's speed in an idealized gas. Maxwell's electromagnetic waves were confirmed by physicist Heinrich Hertz in 1887, when he produced radio waves in his laboratory. Unfortunately, James Maxwell never saw experimental proof of his revolutionary electromagnetic theory. He died from abdominal cancer in 1879 at the age of 48. Lesson SummaryJames Clerk Maxwell is famous for his theory of electromagnetism , a revolutionary theory on electromagnetic waves. Electromagnetic waves, or radiation, are waves that propagate or radiate amongst the electromagnetic field and include visible light, x-rays, radio waves, gamma rays, and ultraviolet rays. Maxwell's electromagnetic theory unified electricity, magnetism, and light and identified them as a type of physical phenomena called electromagnetic radiation. This theory was published with his famous Maxwell equations. James Clerk Maxwell made other contributions to the field of physics as well. He accurately predicted that Saturn's rings were made up of particles, produced the first color photo in 1861, and collaborated with the physicist Ludwig Boltzmann on what would ultimately become the Maxwell-Boltzmann equations. James Clerk Maxwell died in 1879 at the young age of 48, but is remembered as one of the greatest physicists in history.






			
				
				
					To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
				
			
			
			
Create your account













Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?


				I am a student
			

 I am a teacher
			



Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 30 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In

 Back
					


Resources created by teachers for teachers
Over 30,000 video lessons
		& teaching resources‐all
		in one place.
	






Video lessons





Quizzes & Worksheets





Classroom Integration





Lesson Plans



I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues. It’s like a teacher waved a magic wand and did the work for me. I feel like it’s a lifeline.



			Jennifer B.
		

				Teacher
				
				
			

































    
    
		Try it now
	




 Back
	











		Start today. Try it now
		




Table of ContentsWho Was James Clerk Maxwell? Biography of James Clerk Maxwell The Accomplishments of James Clerk Maxwell James Clerk Maxwell Quotes and Legacy Lesson SummaryShow 






Significant Physicists Study Guide


4 chapters |
				
					
					
						75 lessons
						
					
				
			






Ch 1. 
									
										Contemporary Physicists










Ch 2. 
									
										Early 20th Century Physicists










Ch 3. 
									
										Late 20th Century Physicists










Ch 4. 
              Pre-20th Century Physicists






							Heinrich Hertz: Biography, Inventions & Experiment
					

							  










6:22
						 



							Max Planck | Biography, Professional Achievements & Quotes
					



							Max Planck | Equation, Quantum & Atomic Theory
					

							  










4:53
						 



							Joseph Henry | Inductance, Inventions & Contributions
					



							Georg Simon Ohm | Biography, Law & Impact
					



							Leon Foucault | Biography & Inventions
					



							Ludwig Boltzmann | Biography, Equation for Entropy & Death
					



							Ernst Mach's Biography & Accomplishments
					



							Gustav Kirchhoff: Biography, Inventions & Contributions
					



							Heike Kamerlingh Onnes: Super Conductivity & Contributions
					



							James Clerk Maxwell | Biography & Discoveries
					




Next Lesson
James Prescott Joule | Biography, Discoveries & Facts




							Kristian Birkeland: Biography & Terrella Experiment
					



							Kristian Birkeland & the Aurora Borealis
					



							Jagadish Chandra Bose | Biography & Contributions
					

							  










5:21
						 



							Wilhelm Roentgen | Overview, Discovery & Awards
					

							  










6:22
						 



							Amedeo Avogadro: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Amedeo Avogadro's Law | Overview, Principle & Formula
					



							Andre Marie Ampere: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Andre Marie Ampere | Electromagnetism, Inventions & Discoveries
					



							Evangelista Torricelli | Biography & Inventions
					



							Sir Benjamin Thompson | Biography & Contributions
					









James Clerk Maxwell | Biography & Discoveries Related Study Materials




Related Topics






Browse by Courses
General Chemistry for Teachers: Professional Development
Environment & Humanity for Teachers: Professional Development
Physical Geology for Teachers: Professional Development
Principles of Health for Teachers: Professional Development
UExcel Physics: Study Guide & Test Prep
Physical Geology Textbook
Biology 101 Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
Fundamentals of Nursing Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
Middle School Earth Science Curriculum Resource & Lesson Plans
Physical Science Curriculum Resource & Lesson Plans
Earth Science: High School
Holt McDougal Physics: Online Textbook Help
Physical Science for Teachers: Professional Development
Gerontology for Teachers: Professional Development
Natural Sciences for Teachers: Professional Development






Browse by Lessons
Cesium Definition, Facts & Properties
Factors Affecting Energy Flow in Earth's Systems
Nuclear Fuels: Definition, Characteristics & Examples
Macroevolution Overview, Evidences & Examples
Recombinant DNA Definition, Applications & Examples
Alpha Carbon Overview, Acidity & Reactions
Photosynthesis Definition, Process & Equation
Sticky Ends of DNA | Definition, Concept & Examples
Phylogenetic Tree | Definition, Types & Diagram
Introns | Definition, Functions & Sequence
RNA Polymerase II | Overview, Function & Structure
What is Lichen Planus? - Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Crustacean Digestive System
Crustacean Respiratory System
Gamete Intrafallopian Transfer | Definition & Procedure














				Create an account to start this course today
			

						  
							  Used by over 30 million students worldwide
						  
						  
                


				  Create an account
		













Like this lesson



Share




Explore our library of over 88,000 lessons


Search











Browse


						Browse by subject
					


College Courses

Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses



High School Courses

AP
Common Core
GED

High School
See All High School Courses



Other Courses

College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses













Upgrade to enroll
×


Upgrade to Premium to enroll in Significant Physicists Study Guide
Enrolling in a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams.




Track course progress




Take quizzes and exams




Earn certificates of completion



			You will also be able to:
			
Create a Goal
Create custom courses
Get your questions answered




Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!

			Upgrade Now
		
Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!











Download the app




























Plans

Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars® Solutions



About Us

Blog
Careers
Teach For Us
Press Center
Ambassador
Scholarships





Support

FAQ
Site Feedback



Download the app
























Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community








©  Copyright 2024 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		





Terms of Use  
Privacy Policy  
DMCA Notice  
ADA Compliance  
Honor Code For Students


















×








