




Lise Meitner | Physicist who co-discovered nuclear fission | New Scientist
 








 





























 








Close



Advertisement






















 


Skip to content


Sign in




Search the website




















Events


Tours


Shop


Courses


Jobs




Subscribe now 

















Explore by section




News


Features


Newsletters


Podcasts


Video


Comment


Culture


Crosswords

|

This week's magazine







Explore by subject




Health


Space


Physics


Technology


Environment


Mind


Humans


Life


Mathematics


Chemistry


Earth


Society





Explore our products and services




Events


Tours


Shop


Courses


Jobs






Subscribe now 






Subscribe now
Lise Meitner7 November 1878 – 27 October 1968An Austrian-Swedish physicist who co-discovered nuclear fission before fleeing the NazisFacebook / MetaTwitter / X iconWhatsAppLinkedinRedditEmailLook along the bottom row of a standard periodic table and, at number 108, you’ll find meitnerium. A highly radioactive element that doesn’t exist in nature, the half-life of its most stable element is just 7.6 seconds. It’s one of just two elements named after women (the other is curium, after Marie Curie).This is a tribute to a pioneering nuclear physicist, Lise Meitner. Born in Vienna, Austria, in 1878, she excelled in mathematics and science from an early age. In 1905, she became only the second woman to gain a doctorate at the University of Vienna. Shortly afterwards she moved to Berlin, where she became assistant to the pioneering quantum physicist Max Planck.Painfully shy, Meitner also continued to suffer considerable discrimination because she was a woman. It wasn’t until 1913, at the age of 35, that she was first paid a salary. Starting a collaboration with the German nuclear physicist Otto Hahn that would last for the rest of their lives (they were both born and died within a few months of each other), she still wasn’t allowed in his main laboratory. Instead she was banished to a basement carpentry workshop with a separate entrance.Nevertheless, Hahn and Meitner did pioneering work together, along with others including, later, Meitner’s nephew Otto Frisch. In 1917, Hahn and Meitner discovered the first long-lived isotope of the element protactinium, launching a programme of research into heavy radioactive elements at the Kaiser-Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry in Berlin. Slowly accepted by the establishment, Meitner became head of physics there.AdvertisementIt wasn’t to last. Meitner was Jewish, and although her Austrian citizenship spared her dismissal when Hitler came to power in 1933, many of her collaborators, including Frisch, were forced to resign. Many emigrated. When Austria was subsumed into the German Reich in March 1938, her time was up too. With the help of Hahn, she escaped via the Netherlands to Sweden.In exile, she remained in contact with Hahn via letter, who a few months later informed her and Frisch of a puzzling development in the research she had spearheaded: the observation of uranium nuclei breaking up into smaller parts. The information Hahn supplied was enough for Frisch and Meitner to come up with a theory of nuclear fission – and how, by the might of Einstein’s famous equation E = mc2, this process would let out huge amounts of energy.The potential for a bomb that would be far more powerful and destructive than ever before was immediately obvious. The idea that Germany might develop such power on the eve of the second world war galvanised many exiled scientists into action – leading to the initiation of the US Manhattan Project to develop the atom bomb first. Meitner refused to have anything to do with these efforts, and their letters record how both Meitner and Hahn were in sorrow and despair when the first nuclear bomb was used in anger above the Japanese city of Hiroshima in 1945.After the war, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences announced that the delayed 1944 Nobel Prize for chemistry had been awarded for the discovery of nuclear fission – but to Hahn only, not to Meitner. The exclusion of Meitner was later described as the result of a “mixture of disciplinary bias, political obtuseness, ignorance, and haste”.Meitner never returned to Germany, but continued to be active in research until the age of 79. She became a Swedish citizen in 1949, and on retirement in 1960 moved to the UK, where many of her family including Frisch had ended up. She died in 1968 at the age of 89, and is buried in the grounds of the parish church in Bramley, Hampshire. Richard Webb AdvertisementSign up to our weekly newsletterReceive a weekly dose of discovery in your inbox! 
            We'll also keep you up to date with New Scientist 
            events and special offers.Sign upMore on Lise Meitner
        Environment
    
                    Tech firms claim nuclear will solve AI's power needs – they're wrong
                AnalysisSubscriber-only
        Mathematics
    
                    500-year-old maths problem turns out to apply to coffee and clocks
                NewsSubscriber-only
        Physics
    
                    Fusion reactors could create ingredients for a nuclear weapon in weeks
                NewsSubscriber-onlyAdvertisement





Download the app












Find us on social media




Instagram





Facebook





X / Twitter





Tiktok





LinkedIn







Subscriptions


Subscriber benefits


Gift


Student & graduate


Educational


Corporate






Support


Contact us


Help


About us


Advertise


Write for us






Tools


Events


Science Jobs


CoLab


Syndication


RSS feeds






Legal and privacy


Complaint policy


Privacy policy


Cookie policy


Terms & conditions



Cookie Settings











 © Copyright New Scientist Ltd. 

Back to the top










 



