



Los Alamos National Laboratory - Wikipedia




































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file



















Search











Search





























Create account

Log in








Personal tools





 Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History




Toggle History subsection





1.1
The Manhattan Project








1.2
Post-war








1.3
Post-Cold War






1.3.1
Medical work








1.3.2
Negative publicity












2
Science mission








3
Laboratory management and operations




Toggle Laboratory management and operations subsection





3.1
Contract changes








3.2
Safety management










4
Extended operations








5
Controversy and criticism








6
Institutional statistics








7
Directors








8
Notable scientists








9
See also








10
Notes








11
References








12
Further reading








13
External links




Toggle External links subsection





13.1
Archival collections




















Toggle the table of contents







Los Alamos National Laboratory



42 languages




العربيةবাংলাБългарскиBrezhonegCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어ՀայերենBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתLatviešuმარგალურიBahasa MelayuМонголNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийСаха тылаSlovenščinaSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia Commons
























Coordinates: 35°52′32″N 106°19′27″W﻿ / ﻿35.87556°N 106.32417°W﻿ / 35.87556; -106.32417

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Laboratory near Santa Fe, New Mexico
For the World War II-era laboratory in Los Alamos, see Los Alamos Laboratory.


Los Alamos National LaboratoryLANLAerial viewEstablished1943 (1943)Budget$3.92 billion[1]Field of research
National security
Fundamental science
DirectorThomas MasonStaff12,752[1]Students1,613[1]LocationLos Alamos, New Mexico, United States35°52′32″N 106°19′27″W﻿ / ﻿35.87556°N 106.32417°W﻿ / 35.87556; -106.32417Affiliations
University of California
Battelle Memorial Institute
Texas A&M University
Operating agencyTriad National Security LLCWebsitehttps://www.lanl.gov/Los Alamos Scientific LaboratoryU.S. National Register of Historic PlacesU.S. Historic districtU.S. National Historic Landmark District
LocationCentral Ave., Los Alamos, New MexicoCoordinates35°52′54″N 106°17′54″W﻿ / ﻿35.88167°N 106.29833°W﻿ / 35.88167; -106.29833Area22,200 acres (9,000 ha)[3]Built1943 (1943)Architectural styleBungalow/Craftsman, Modern Movement, RanchNRHP reference No.66000893[2]Significant datesAdded to NRHPOctober 15, 1966Designated NHLDDecember 21, 1965[4]

Los Alamos National Laboratory (often shortened as Los Alamos and LANL) is one of the sixteen research and development laboratories of the United States Department of Energy (DOE), located a short distance northwest of Santa Fe, New Mexico, in the American southwest. Best known for its central role in helping develop the first atomic bomb, LANL is one of the world's largest and most advanced scientific institutions.[5]
Los Alamos was established in 1943 as Project Y, a top-secret site for designing nuclear weapons under the Manhattan Project during World War II.[note 1] Chosen for its remote yet relatively accessible location, it served as the main hub for conducting and coordinating nuclear research,[6] bringing together some of the world's most famous scientists, among them numerous Nobel Prize winners.[7][8] The town of Los Alamos, directly north of the lab, grew extensively through this period.
After the war ended in 1945, Project Y's existence was made public, and it became known universally as Los Alamos. In 1952, the Atomic Energy Commission formed a second design lab under the direction of the University of California, Berkeley, which became the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL).[9] The two labs competed on a wide variety of bomb designs, but with the end of the Cold War, have focused increasingly on civilian missions. Today, Los Alamos conducts multidisciplinary research in fields such as national security, space exploration, nuclear fusion, renewable energy,[10] medicine, nanotechnology, and supercomputing.
While owned by the federal government, LANL is privately managed and operated by Triad National Security, LLC.[7][11]


History[edit]
The Manhattan Project[edit]
Main article: Project Y
The laboratory was founded during World War II as a secret, centralized facility to coordinate the scientific research of the Manhattan Project, the Allied project to develop the first nuclear weapons.[12] In September 1942, the difficulties encountered in conducting preliminary studies on nuclear weapons at universities scattered across the country indicated the need for a laboratory dedicated solely to that purpose.[citation needed]
General Leslie Groves wanted a central laboratory at an isolated location for safety, and to keep the scientists away from the populace. It should be at least 200 miles from international boundaries and west of the Mississippi. Major John Dudley suggested Oak City, Utah, or Jemez Springs, New Mexico, but both were rejected. Jemez Springs was only a short distance from the current site. Project Y director J. Robert Oppenheimer had spent much time in his youth in the New Mexico area and suggested the Los Alamos Ranch School on the mesa. Dudley had rejected the school as not meeting Groves' criteria, but as soon as Groves saw it he said in effect "This is the place".[13] Oppenheimer became the laboratory's first director; from 19 October 1942.
During the Manhattan Project, Los Alamos hosted thousands of employees, including many Nobel Prize-winning scientists. The location was a total secret. Its only mailing address was a post office box, number 1663, in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Eventually two other post office boxes were used, 180 and 1539, also in Santa Fe.[14] Though its contract with the University of California was initially intended to be temporary,[citation needed] the relationship was maintained long after the war. Until the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan, University of California president Robert Sproul did not know what the purpose of the laboratory was and thought it might be producing a "death ray".[15] The only member of the UC administration who knew its true purpose—indeed, the only one who knew its exact physical location—was the Secretary-Treasurer Robert Underhill, who was in charge of wartime contracts and liabilities.[citation needed]

The first stages of the explosion of the Trinity nuclear test
The work of the laboratory culminated in several atomic devices, one of which was used in the first nuclear test near Alamogordo, New Mexico, codenamed "Trinity", on July 16, 1945. The other two were weapons, "Little Boy" and "Fat Man", which were used in the attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The Laboratory received the Army-Navy "E" Award for Excellence in production on October 16, 1945.[citation needed]

Post-war[edit]
After the war, Oppenheimer retired from the directorship, and it was taken over by Norris Bradbury, whose initial mission was to make the previously hand-assembled atomic bombs "G.I. proof" so that they could be mass-produced and used without the assistance of highly trained scientists. Other founding members of Los Alamos left the laboratory and became outspoken opponents to the further development of nuclear weapons.[citation needed]
The name officially changed to the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory (LASL) on January 1, 1947. By this time, Argonne had already been made the first National Laboratory the previous year. Los Alamos would not become a National Laboratory in name until 1981.[16]
In the years since the 1940s, Los Alamos was responsible for the development of the hydrogen bomb, and many other variants of nuclear weapons. In 1952, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory was founded to act as Los Alamos' "competitor", with the hope that two laboratories for the design of nuclear weapons would spur innovation. Los Alamos and Livermore served as the primary classified laboratories in the U.S. national laboratory system, designing all the country's nuclear arsenal. Additional work included basic scientific research, particle accelerator development, health physics, and fusion power research as part of Project Sherwood. Many nuclear tests were undertaken in the Marshall Islands and at the Nevada Test Site. During the late-1950s, a number of scientists including Dr. J. Robert "Bob" Beyster left Los Alamos to work for General Atomics (GA) in San Diego.[17]
Three major nuclear-related accidents have occurred at LANL. Criticality accidents occurred in August 1945 and May 1946, and a third accident occurred during an annual physical inventory in December 1958.[18]
Several buildings associated with the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos were declared a National Historic Landmark in 1965.[4][19]

Post-Cold War[edit]
At the end of the Cold War, both labs went through a process of intense scientific diversification in their research programs to adapt to the changing political conditions that no longer required as much research towards developing new nuclear weapons and has led the lab to increase research for "non-war" science and technology. Los Alamos' nuclear work is currently thought to relate primarily to computer simulations and stockpile stewardship. The development of the Dual-Axis Radiographic Hydrodynamic Test Facility will allow complex simulations of nuclear tests to take place without full explosive yields.[citation needed]
The laboratory contributed to the early development of the flow cytometry technology. In the 1950s, researcher Mack Fulwyler developed a technique for sorting erythrocytes that combined the Coulter Principle of Coulter counter technologies, which measures the presence of cells and their size, with ink jet technology, which produces a laminar flow of liquid that breaks up into separate, fine drops. In 1969, Los Alamos reported the first fluorescence detector apparatus, which accurately measured the number and size of ovarian cells and blood cells.[20]
As of 2017, other research performed at the lab included developing cheaper, cleaner biofuels and advancing scientific understanding around renewable energy.[21]
Non-nuclear national security and defense development is also a priority at the lab. This includes preventing outbreaks of deadly diseases by improving detection tools and the monitoring the effectiveness of the United States' vaccine distribution infrastructure. Additional advancements include the ASPECT airplane that can detect bio threats from the sky.[22]

Medical work[edit]
In 2008, development for a safer, more comfortable and accurate test for breast cancer was ongoing by scientists Lianjie Huang and Kenneth M. Hanson and collaborators. The new technique, called ultrasound-computed tomography (ultrasound CT), uses sound waves to accurately detect small tumors that traditional mammography cannot.[23]
The lab has made intense efforts for humanitarian causes through its scientific research in medicine. In 2010, three vaccines for the Human Immunodeficiency Virus were being tested by lab scientist Bette Korber and her team. "These vaccines might finally deal a lethal blow to the AIDS virus", says Chang-Shung Tung, leader of the Lab's Theoretical Biology and Biophysics group.[24]

Negative publicity[edit]
The laboratory has attracted negative publicity from a number of events. In 1999, Los Alamos scientist Wen Ho Lee was accused of 59 counts of mishandling classified information by downloading nuclear secrets—"weapons codes" used for computer simulations of nuclear weapons tests—to data tapes and removing them from the lab. After ten months in jail, Lee pleaded guilty to a single count and the other 58 were dismissed with an apology from U.S. District Judge James Parker for his incarceration.[25] Lee had been suspected for having shared U.S. nuclear secrets with China, but investigators were never able to establish what Lee did with the downloaded data.[26] In 2000, two computer hard drives containing classified data were announced to have gone missing from a secure area within the laboratory, but were later found behind a photocopier.[27]

Science mission[edit]
Los Alamos National Laboratory's mission is to "solve national security challenges through simultaneous excellence".[28] The laboratory's strategic plan reflects U.S. priorities spanning nuclear security, intelligence, defense, emergency response, nonproliferation, counterterrorism, energy security, emerging threats, and environmental management. This strategy is aligned with priorities set by the Department of Energy (DOE), the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), and national strategy guidance documents, such as the Nuclear Posture Review, the National Security Strategy, and the Blueprint for a Secure Energy Future
Los Alamos is the senior laboratory in the DOE system, and executes work in all areas of the DOE mission: national security, science, energy, and environmental management.[29] The laboratory also performs work for the Department of Defense (DoD), Intelligence Community (IC), and Department of Homeland Security (DHS), among others. The laboratory's multidisciplinary scientific capabilities and activities are organized into six Capability Pillars:[30]

Information, Science and Technology (IS&T)
Materials for the Future seeks to optimize materials for national security applications by predicting and controlling their performance and functionality through discovery science and engineering.
Nuclear and Particle Futures integrates nuclear experiments, theory, and simulation to understand and engineer complex nuclear phenomena.
Science of Signatures (SoS) applies science and technology to intransigent problems of system identification and characterization in areas of global security, nuclear defense, energy, and health.
Complex Natural and Engineered Systems (CNES)
Weapons Systems (WS)
Los Alamos operates three main user facilities:

The Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies: The Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies is a DOE/Office of Science National User Facility operated jointly by Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories with facilities at both Laboratories. CINT is dedicated to establishing the scientific principles that govern the design, performance, and integration of nanoscale materials into microscale and macroscale systems and devices.[31]
Los Alamos Neutron Science Center (LANSCE): The Los Alamos Neutron Science Center is one of the world's most powerful linear accelerators. LANSCE provides the scientific community with intense sources of neutrons with the capability of performing experiments supporting civilian and national security research. This facility is sponsored by the Department of Energy, the National Nuclear Security Administration, Office of Science and Office of Nuclear Energy, Science and Technology.
The National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL), Pulsed Field Facility: The Pulsed Field Facility at Los Alamos National Laboratory in Los Alamos, New Mexico, is one of three campuses of the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL), the other two being at Florida State University, Tallahassee and the University of Florida. The Pulsed Field Facility at Los Alamos National Laboratory operates an international user program for research in high magnetic fields.
As of 2017, the Los Alamos National Laboratory is using data and algorithms to possibly protect public health by tracking the growth of infectious diseases. Digital epidemiologists at the lab's Information Systems and Modeling group are using clinical surveillance data, Google search queries, census data, Wikipedia, and even tweets to create a system that could predict epidemics. The team is using data from Brazil as its model; Brazil was notably threatened by the Zika virus as it prepared to host the Summer Olympics in 2016.[32]

Laboratory management and operations[edit]
Within LANL's 43-square-mile property are approximately 2,000 dumpsites which have contaminated the environment. It also contributed to thousands of dumpsites at 108 locations in 29 US states.[33]

Contract changes[edit]
Continuing efforts to make the laboratory more efficient led the Department of Energy to open its contract with the University of California to bids from other vendors in 2003. Though the university and the laboratory had difficult relations many times since their first World War II contract, this was the first time that the university ever had to compete for management of the laboratory. The University of California decided to create a private company with the Bechtel Corporation, Washington Group International, and the BWX Technologies to bid on the contract to operate the laboratory. The UC/Bechtel led corporation—Los Alamos National Security, LLC (LANS)—was pitted against a team formed by the University of Texas System partnered with Lockheed-Martin. In December 2005, the Department of Energy announced that LANS had won the next seven-year contract to manage and operate the laboratory.[citation needed]
On June 1, 2006, the University of California ended its sixty years of direct involvement in operating Los Alamos National Laboratory, and management control of the laboratory was taken over by Los Alamos National Security, LLC with effect October 1, 2007. Approximately 95% of the former 10,000 plus UC employees at LANL were rehired by LANS to continue working at LANL. Other than UC appointing three members to the eleven member board of directors that oversees LANS, UC now has virtually no responsibility or direct involvement in LANL. UC policies and regulations that apply to UC campuses and its two national laboratories in California (Lawrence Berkeley and Lawrence Livermore) no longer apply to LANL, and the LANL director no longer reports to the UC Regents or UC Office of the President.[citation needed]
On June 8, 2018, the NNSA announced that Triad National Security, LLC, a joint venture between Battelle Memorial Institute, the University of California, and Texas A&M University, would assume operation and management of LANL beginning November 1, 2018.[34]

Safety management[edit]
In August 2011, the close placement of eight plutonium rods for a photo nearly led to a criticality incident. The photo shoot, which was directed by the laboratory's management, was one of several factors relating to unsafe management practices that led to the departure of 12 of the lab's 14 safety staff.[35] The criticality incident was one of several that led the Department of Energy to seek alternative bids to manage the laboratory after the 2018 expiration of the LANS contract.[36]
The lab was penalized with a $57 million reduction in its 2014 budget over the February 14, 2014, accident at the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant for which it was partly responsible.[37]
In August 2017, the improper storage of plutonium metal could have triggered a criticality accident, and subsequently staff failed to declare the failure as required by procedure.[36][38]

Extended operations[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
With support of the National Science Foundation, LANL operates one of the three National High Magnetic Field Laboratories in conjunction with and located at two other sites Florida State University in Tallahassee, Florida, and University of Florida in Gainesville, Florida.
Los Alamos National Laboratory is a partner in the Joint Genome Institute (JGI) located in Walnut Creek, California. JGI was founded in 1997 to unite the expertise and resources in genome mapping, DNA sequencing, technology development, and information sciences pioneered at the three genome centers at University of California's Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL), Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), and LANL.
The Integrated Computing Network (ICN) is a multi-security level network at the LANL integrating large host supercomputers, a file server, a batch server, a printer and graphics output server and numerous other general purpose and specialized systems. IBM Roadrunner, which was part of this network, was the first supercomputer to hit petaflop speeds.[39]
Until 1999, The Los Alamos National Laboratory hosted the arXiv e-print archive.[40] The arXiv is currently operated and funded by Cornell University.
The coreboot project was initially developed at LANL.[41]
In the recent years, the Laboratory has developed a major research program in systems biology modeling, known at LANL under the name q-bio.
Several serials are published by LANL:[42]

National Security Science
1663
Community Connections
Actinide Research Quarterly
@theBradbury
Physical Sciences Vistas

LANL also published Los Alamos Science from 1980 to 2005, as well as the Nuclear Weapons Journal, which was replaced by National Security Science after two issues in 2009.

Controversy and criticism[edit]
In 2005, Congress held new hearings on lingering security issues at Los Alamos National Weapons Laboratory in New Mexico; documented problems continued to be ignored.[43][44]
In November 2008, a drum containing nuclear waste was ruptured due to a 'deflagration' according to an inspector general report of the Dept. of Energy, which due to lab mistakes, also occurred in 2014 at the Carlsbad plant with significant disruptions and costs across the industry.[45]
In 2009, 69 computers which did not contain classified information were lost.[46] The same year also saw a scare in which 1 kg (2.2 lb) of missing plutonium prompted a Department of Energy investigation into the laboratory. The investigation found that the "missing plutonium" was a result of miscalculation by LANL's statisticians and did not actually exist; but the investigation did lead to heavy criticism of the laboratory by the DOE for security flaws and weaknesses that the DOE claimed to have found.[47][48]

Institutional statistics[edit]
LANL is northern New Mexico's largest institution and the largest employer with approximately 8,762 direct employees, 277 guard force, 505 contractors, 1,613 students, 1,143 unionized craft workers, and 452 post-doctoral researchers.[49] Additionally, there are roughly 120 DOE employees stationed at the laboratory to provide federal oversight of LANL's work and operations. Approximately one-third of the laboratory's technical staff members are physicists, one-quarter are engineers, one-sixth are chemists and materials scientists, and the remainder work in mathematics and computational science, biology, geoscience, and other disciplines. Professional scientists and students also come to Los Alamos as visitors to participate in scientific projects. The staff collaborates with universities and industry in both basic and applied research to develop resources for the future. The annual budget is approximately US$2.2 billion.

Directors[edit]
J. Robert Oppenheimer (1942–1945)
Norris Bradbury (1945–1970)
Harold Agnew (1970–1979)
Donald Kerr (1979–1986)
Siegfried S. Hecker (1986–1997)
John C. Browne (1997–2003)
George Peter Nanos (2003–2005)
Robert W. Kuckuck (2005–2006)
Michael R. Anastasio (2006–2011)
Charles F. McMillan (2011–2017)
Terry Wallace (2018)
Thomas Mason (2018–present)
Notable scientists[edit]
Stirling Colgate (1925–2013)
George Cowan (1920–2012), American physical chemist, businessman, and philanthropist
Mitchell Feigenbaum (1944–2019)
Richard Feynman (1918–1988)
Bette Korber
Maria Goeppert Mayer (1906–1972)
Howard O. McMahon (1914–1990), Canadian-born American electrical engineer, inventor of the Gifford-McMahon cryocooler, and the Science Director, Vice President, Head of the Research and Development Division, and then President of Arthur D. Little, Inc; lived and worked partially in Los Alamos during development of the first Hydrogen bomb
Emily Willbanks (1930–2007)
See also[edit]

Anti-nuclear movement in the United States
Association of Los Alamos Scientists
Bradbury Science Museum
Chalk River Laboratories
Federation of American Scientists
Clarence Max Fowler
David Greenglass
Ed Grothus
Theodore Hall
History of nuclear weapons
Hydrogen-moderated self-regulating nuclear power module
National Historic Landmarks in New Mexico
National Register of Historic Places listings in Los Alamos County, New Mexico
Julius and Ethel Rosenberg
Timeline of Cox Report controversy
Timeline of nuclear weapons development
Venona project

Notes[edit]


^ The site was variously called Los Alamos Laboratory and Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory.


References[edit]


^ a b c "Facts, Figures". Retrieved September 16, 2022.

^ "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. July 9, 2010.

^ "LANL Location and Infrastructure". Retrieved October 20, 2019.

^ a b "National Historic Landmarks Survey, New Mexico" (PDF). National Park Service. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022. Retrieved December 29, 2016.

^ "Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) | UCOP". ucop.edu. Retrieved December 1, 2022.

^ "50th Anniversary Article: Oppenheimer's Better Idea: Ranch School Becomes Arsenal of Democracy". Los Alamos National Laboratory. Archived from the original on 20 April 2011.

^ a b Energy, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Operated by Los Alamos National Security, LLC, for the U. S. Department of. "Our History". lanl.gov. Retrieved August 2, 2019.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ "Los Alamos, NM". Atomic Heritage Foundation. Retrieved August 2, 2019.

^ "History". Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. October 9, 2013. Retrieved August 2, 2019.

^ 
"The Drive Toward Hydrogen Vehicles Just Got Shorter". Chem.info. March 21, 2011. Archived from the original on March 21, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2012.

^ Energy, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Operated by Los Alamos National Security, LLC, for the U. S. Department of. "Leadership, Governance". lanl.gov. Retrieved August 2, 2019.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ Force V: The history of Britain's airborne deterrent, by Andrew Brookes. Jane's Publishing Co Ltd; First Edition 1 Jan. 1982, ISBN 0710602383, p.2.

^ 
Rhodes, Richard (1995). The making of the Atomic Bomb. London: Simon & Schuster. pp. 449–451. ISBN 0-671-44133-7.

^ 
Modern Postal History Journal (26): 5–8. 1989. {{cite journal}}: Missing or empty |title= (help)

^ Cstms.berkeley.edu Archived October 19, 2013, at the Wayback Machine

^ Plans and Practices for Groundwater Protection at the Los Alamos National Laboratory. National Research Council. October 18, 2007. p. 5. ISBN 9780309106191.

^ 
Beyster, Robert J, Dr; Economy, Peter (2007). The SAIC Solution: How We Built an $8 Billion Employee-Owned Technology Company. John Wiley & Sons. p. 192. ISBN 9780470139318.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ "Sources and Effects of Ionizing Radiation – 2008 Report to the General Assembly" (PDF). United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation. 2011. pp. 2–3. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022.

^ Greenwood, Richard (January 14, 1974). "National Register of Historic Places Inventory-Nomination Form / Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory" (pdf). National Park Service. Retrieved June 21, 2009."Accompanying photos". National Park Service. Retrieved December 18, 2012.

^ Givan, Alice (April 5, 2004). Flow Cytometry First Principles. p. 6. ISBN 9780471459118.

^ "Applied Energy Program". Los Alamos National Laboratory. Retrieved January 31, 2017.

^ "Los Alamos National Lab: National Security Science". www.lanl.gov. Retrieved October 24, 2019.

^ Huang, Lianjie; Hanson, Kenneth M.; Quan, Youli; Li, Cuiping; Duric, Neb (2008). "Globally optimized Fourier finite-difference method for ultrasound breast imaging". In McAleavey, Stephen A; d'Hooge, Jan (eds.). Medical Imaging 2008: Ultrasonic Imaging and Signal Processing. Proceedings of SPIE. Vol. 692007. p. 692007. doi:10.1117/12.771024. S2CID 14509019.

^ Korber, Bette (March 3, 2010). "HIV Vaccine Strategy Expands Immune Responses". Los Alamos National Laboratory. Archived from the original on October 21, 2011. Retrieved January 12, 2012.

^ 
"United States of America vs. Wen Ho Lee transcript of Proceedings". September 13, 2000. Retrieved December 18, 2012.

^ 
Epstein, Edward Jay (January 16, 2002). "Wen Ho Lee". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved December 18, 2012.

^ Risen, James (June 17, 2000). "Missing Nuclear Data Found Behind a Los Alamos Copier". The New York Times. New York City. Retrieved October 14, 2021.

^ Communications & Public Affairs (n.d.). "Los Alamos National Laboratory | Mission". Los Alamos National Laboratory. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 30 June 2022. Los Alamos National Laboratory's mission is to solve national security challenges through simultaneous excellence.

^ "Mission | Department of Energy". United States Department of Energy. Retrieved June 30, 2016.

^ Science, Technology and Engineering Office (n.d.). "Los Alamos National Laboratory | Capability Pillars". Los Alamos National Laboratory. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 30 June 2022.

^ "Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies (CINT) | U.S. DOE Office of Science (SC)". science.energy.gov. Retrieved June 30, 2016.

^ Galford, Chris (October 4, 2017). "Los Alamos National Laboratory reveals potential in tracking disease spread in real time". Homeland Preparedness News. Retrieved October 11, 2017.

^ Staci Matlock (July 13, 2015). "TRINITY: 70 YEARS LATER 'Los Alamos will never be clean'". The Santa Fe New Mexican. Retrieved July 18, 2015.

^ National Nuclear Security Administration (June 8, 2018). "NNSA awards Los Alamos National Laboratory Management & Operating Contract". Washington, D.C. Retrieved July 29, 2018.

^ The Center for Public Integrity, Patrick Malone: Repeated safety lapses hobble Los Alamos National Laboratory's work on the cores of U.S. nuclear warheads. Science 356, 2017, doi:10.1126/science.aan7026.

^ a b Reese, April (January 19, 2018). "After safety breaches, new Los Alamos director pushes for accountability at nuclear weapons lab". Science. Retrieved January 20, 2018.

^ W.J. Hennigan and Ralph Vartabedian: Los Alamos lab contractor loses $57 million over nuclear waste accident. Los Angeles Times, January 11, 2015.

^ Oswald, Mark (September 22, 2017). "'Criticality safety event' occurred at LANL's plutonium facility". Albuquerque Journal. Retrieved January 20, 2018.

^ Fox, Maggie (June 9, 2008). "Energy Dept says new computer world's fastest". Reuters. Retrieved March 4, 2016.

^ "Los Alamos loses physics archive as preprint pioneer heads east". June 5, 2001. Retrieved March 4, 2016.

^ "FAQ - coreboot". www.coreboot.org.

^ "Publications".

^ Attkisson, Sharyl (March 21, 2005). "Congress Eyes Los Alamos". CBS News. Retrieved April 14, 2014.

^ noahmax (March 20, 2005). "MORE LOS ALAMOS SHENANIGANS". defensetech.org. Retrieved April 14, 2014.

^ Wald, Matthew L. (October 29, 2014). "In U.S. Cleanup Efforts, Accident at Nuclear Site Points to Cost of Lapses ". NY Times website Retrieved January 27, 2017.

^ Reichbach, Matthew (February 12, 2009). "69 Computers Missing at LANL". The New Mexico Independent. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. Retrieved December 18, 2012.

^ 
Vartabedian, Ralph (March 26, 2009). "Los Alamos' Security Flaws Exposed". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 18, 2012.

^ 
Webb, Greg (February 27, 2009). "New Security Lapse at Los Alamos Triggers Angry Response from Energy Department". Global Security Newswire. NTI. Retrieved December 18, 2012.

^ "Facts, Figures". Archived from the original on December 12, 2010.


Further reading[edit]
Hoddeson, Lillian; Henriksen, Paul W.; Meade, Roger A.; Westfall, Catherine L. (1993). Critical Assembly: A Technical History of Los Alamos during the Oppenheimer Years, 1943–1945. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-44132-3.
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Los Alamos National Laboratory.

Official website
Los Alamos – Overview of Historical Operations
Annotated bibliography on Los Alamos from the Alsos Digital Library
University of California Office of Laboratory Management (official website)
Los Alamos Neutron Science Center "LANSCE"
Los Alamos Weather Machine
LANL: The Real Story (LANL community blog)
LANL: The Corporate Story (follow-up blog to "LANL: The Real Story)
LANL: Technology Transfer, an example
LANL: The Rest of the Story (ongoing blog for LANL employees)
Protecting the Nation's Nuclear Materials. Government Calls Arms Complexes Secure; Critics Disagree NPR.
Los Alamos Study Group – an Albuquerque-based group opposed to nuclear weapons
Site Y: Los Alamos A map of Manhattan Project Era Site Y: Los Alamos, New Mexico.
Los Alamos National Laboratory Nuclear Facilities, 1997
Machinists who assembled the atomic bomb.
Archival collections[edit]
Los Alamos University notebooks, 1945-1946, Niels Bohr Library & Archives
vteManhattan ProjectTimelineSites
Ames
Berkeley
Chicago (Site A)
Dayton
Hanford
Inyokern
Los Alamos
Montreal
New York
Oak Ridge
Salt Wells Pilot Plant
Trinity
Wendover
Heavy water sites
Administrators
Vannevar Bush
Arthur Compton
James B. Conant
Priscilla Duffield
Thomas Farrell
Leslie Groves
John Lansdale
Ernest Lawrence
James Marshall
Franklin Matthias
Dorothy McKibbin
Kenneth Nichols
Robert Oppenheimer
Deak Parsons
Boris Pash
William Purnell
Frank Spedding
Charles Thomas
Paul Tibbets
Bud Uanna
Harold Urey
Stafford Warren
Ed Westcott
Roscoe Wilson
Scientists
Luis Alvarez
Robert Bacher
Hans Bethe
Aage Bohr
Niels Bohr
Norris Bradbury
James Chadwick
John Cockcroft
Charles Critchfield
Harry Daghlian
John R. Dunning
Enrico Fermi
Richard Feynman
Val Fitch
James Franck
Klaus Fuchs
Maria Goeppert Mayer
George Kistiakowsky
George Koval
Willard Libby
Edwin McMillan
Mark Oliphant
George B. Pegram
Norman Ramsey Jr.
Isidor Isaac Rabi
James Rainwater
Bruno Rossi
Glenn Seaborg
Emilio Segrè
Louis Slotin
Henry DeWolf Smyth
Leo Szilard
Edward Teller
Stanisław Ulam
John von Neumann
John Wheeler
Eugene Wigner
Robert Wilson
Leona Woods
Chien-Shiung Wu
Operations
Alsos Mission
Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Operation Crossroads
Operation Peppermint
Project Alberta
Silverplate
509th Composite Group
Enola Gay
Bockscar
The Great Artiste
Weapons
Fat Man
Little Boy
Pumpkin bomb
Thin Man
Related topics
African Americans
Atomic Energy Act of 1946
Bismuth phosphate process
British contribution
Calutron Girls
Chicago Pile-1
Demon core
Einstein–Szilard letter
Franck Report
Interim Committee
K-25 Project
Los Alamos Primer
Nobel Prize laureates
Oppenheimer security hearing
Plutonium
Quebec Agreement
RaLa Experiment
S-1 Executive Committee
S-50 Project
Smyth Report
Uranium
X-10 Graphite Reactor
Y-12 Project
 Category
vteUnited States Department of Energy
Headquarters: James V. Forrestal Building
Jennifer Granholm, Secretary of Energy
David Turk, Deputy Secretary of Energy
Deputy Secretary of Energy
Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence
Energy Information Administration
Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy
Under Secretary of Energy for InfrastructureOffice of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, & Energy ResponseUnder Secretary of Energy for Nuclear Security
National Nuclear Security Administration
Under Secretary of Energy for Science and Innovation
Office of Science
OSTI
Office of Electricity
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management
Office of Nuclear Energy
Assistant Secretary of Energy for Nuclear EnergyOffice of Nuclear EnergyPower Marketing Administration
Bonneville Power Administration
Southeastern Power Administration
Southwestern Power Administration
Western Area Power Administration
National Laboratory System
Ames
Argonne
NBL
CNM
APS
ATLAS
EMC
Berkeley
ALS
MF
NCEM
NERSCC
ESN
JGI
Brookhaven
AGS
CFN
NSLS
NSLS II
RHIC
Fermilab
TeV
Idaho
RESL
JLab
Livermore
NARAC
NIF
Los Alamos
DARHTF
NETL
Albany
NREL
Oak Ridge
SNS
CNMS
HFIR
NCCS
Pacific Northwest
EMSL
PPPL
NSTX
TFTR
SRNL
Sandia
Z
SLAC
SSRL
Energy Department Facilities and Reservations
Fernald NLO
Hanford
K-25
Kansas City Plant
Nevada Test Site
Area 19
Area 20
NHHOR
Pantex
Rocky Flats
SSFL
ETEC
SRE
SRS
SPR
WIPP
Y-12
Yucca Mountain
Related Independent Agency
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

vteNew Mexico during World War IIPeople
Jack Aeby
Jerry C. Begay
John J. Dempsey
Thomas Farrell
Enrico Fermi
Leslie Groves
John E. Miles
Chester Nez
Lloyd Oliver
Willard Varnell Oliver
J. Robert Oppenheimer
Merril Sandoval
Emilio G. Segrè
Frank Tsosie Thompson
Military installations
Alamogordo Army Airfield
Camp Lordsburg
Clovis Army Airfield
Carlsbad Army Airfield
Deming Army Airfield
Fort Stanton
Fort Sumner Army Aifield
Hobbs Army Airfield
Kirtland Field
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Roswell Army Airfield
White Sands Proving Ground
See also
200th Coast Artillery
American Theater
Arizona during World War II
Bat bomb
Code talker
Escape from Fort Stanton
Lordsburg Killings
Manhattan Project
Military history of the United States during World War II
Nevada during World War II
New Mexico World War II Army Airfields
Santa Fe Riot
Trinity

vteUniversity of CaliforniaCampuses
Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Merced
Riverside
San Diego
San Francisco
Santa Barbara
Santa Cruz
Governance
Regents
Student regent
President
Police
Student Association
ResearchNational Lab
Lawrence Berkeley
Lawrence Livermore
Los Alamos
Observatories
Lick
W. M. Keck
Institutes
Telecommunications and Information Technology
Information Technology Research
NanoSystems
Quantitative Biosciences
Oceanography
Other
Natural Reserve System
HealthUCD
Medical Center
UCI
Medical Center
Fountain Valley
Lakewood
Los Alamitos
Placentia
UCLA
Ronald Reagan
Santa Monica
Harbor
Olive View
Neuropsychiatric
Children's Hospital
Cancer Center
UCSD
Medical Center, Hillcrest
Jacobs Medical Center
Cancer Center
East Campus Medical Center
UCSF
Medical Center
Cancer Hospital
Children's Hospital
Women's Hospital
Cancer Center
Fetal Treatment
Saint Francis Memorial Hospital
St. Mary's Medical Center
Media
California Digital Library
Press
journals
Television
Libraries
Student newspapers

vteU.S. National Register of Historic PlacesTopics
Architectural style categories
Contributing property
Historic district
History of the National Register of Historic Places
Keeper of the Register
National Park Service
Property types
Lists by state
List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks by state:
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
Lists by insular areas
American Samoa
Guam
Minor Outlying Islands
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
Lists by associated state
Federated States of Micronesia
Marshall Islands
Palau
Other areas
District of Columbia
American Legation, Morocco
Related
National Historic Preservation Act
Historic Preservation Fund
List of jails and prisons on the National Register of Historic Places
University and college buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places

 National Register of Historic Places portal
 Category

Portals: History of Science National Register of Historic Places Nuclear technology Physics
Authority control databases International
ISNI
2
VIAF
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Australia
Other
NARA
IdRef





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Los_Alamos_National_Laboratory&oldid=1224225938"
Categories: Los Alamos National LaboratoryLos Alamos, New MexicoUnited States Department of Energy national laboratoriesBuildings and structures in Los Alamos County, New MexicoFederally Funded Research and Development CentersGovernment buildings in New MexicoManhattan Project sitesNuclear research institutesNuclear weapons infrastructure of the United StatesSupercomputer sitesHistory of Los Alamos County, New MexicoGovernment buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in New MexicoHistoric districts on the National Register of Historic Places in New MexicoNational Historic Landmarks in New MexicoNational Register of Historic Places in Los Alamos County, New MexicoWorld War II on the National Register of Historic PlacesBechtelUniversity of CaliforniaMilitary research of the United StatesPhysics research institutesTheoretical physics institutes1943 establishments in New MexicoResearch institutes in New MexicoHidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlasArticles using NRISref without a reference numberCS1 maint: multiple names: authors listCS1 errors: missing titleWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse mdy dates from March 2018Coordinates on WikidataNRHP infobox with nocatAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2019Articles with unsourced statements from January 2009Articles with unsourced statements from August 2010Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024Articles needing additional references from July 2015All articles needing additional referencesCommons link is on WikidataOfficial website different in Wikidata and WikipediaArticles with ISNI identifiersArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNFdata identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NLA identifiersArticles with NARA identifiersArticles with SUDOC identifiers






 This page was last edited on 17 May 2024, at 01:05 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view













Toggle limited content width







