


Manhattan Project: People > Scientists > HANS BETHE




















Events


People


Places


Processes


Science


Resources




People

Administrators


Scientists


Civilian Organizations


Military Organizations


Non-Technical Personnel







HANS BETHE

(Physicist, director of Los Alamos Theoretical Division)

People > Scientists


Bethe, Hans


Chadwick, James


Einstein, Albert


Fermi, Enrico


Feynman, Richard


Franck, James


Fuchs, Klaus


Rotblat, Joseph


Seaborg, Glenn T.


Serber, Robert


Szilard, Leo


Teller, Edward


Wigner, Eugene


York, Herbert



                                            Hans Bethe was born in Strasbourg, Alsace-Lorraine, on July 2, 1906. He attended high school and university in Frankfurt, Germany, and
                                            completed his Ph.D. working under the famous physicist Arnold Sommerfeld in July 1928. He worked and lectured in Germany before traveling
                                            with fellowship support to study in Cambridge, England, and Rome, Italy. At that time both cities were important centers of new physics research.
                                            In 1932 he accepted a job as professor at Germany's University of Tübingen. Bethe, whose mother was Jewish, was forced out a year later due to Hitler's
                                            purge of civil service employees. Following a brief period of study in Copenhagen at the laboratory of famed physicist Niels Bohr and a period of
                                            teaching in Manchester, England, Bethe in 1935 was offered and accepted an academic position at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, where he
                                            worked on nuclear reactions. He would remain at Cornell for the remainder of his career.
                                        


                                            When war broke out in Europe in 1939, Bethe began working on the development of radar at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Radiation Laboratory.
                                            He initially thought that uranium research leading to a possible bomb was impractical. "I considered," he later noted, "an atomic bomb so remote that I completely
                                            refused to have anything to do with it." In late spring 1942, Robert Oppenheimer, whom Arthur Compton had asked to coordinate
                                            weapon
                                            theory and fast neutron research, invited Bethe to attend a joint meeting of theorists and experimentalists. Oppenheimer thought highly of Bethe.
                                            In May, he wrote Ernest Lawrence that with "three experienced men" it would be possible to solve the theoretical problems of building a bomb.
                                            His short list of experienced theorists included Bethe, along with John Van Vleck, Edward Teller, and Robert Serber.
                                            Bethe and his wife drove from Ithaca to the initial two-day meeting held in early June in Chicago at the Met Lab.
                                            By now he had concluded, especially after observing Enrico Fermi's pile work at the Met Lab, that a fission bomb would probably work.
                                            From Chicago, the Bethe's drove with their good friends Teller and his wife to Berkeley where a second, longer conference took place at the
                                            University of California beginning the second week of July. At Berkeley, a broad range of theoretical issues were discussed,
                                            including a thermonuclear bomb, which became known as the Super, and the possibility of igniting the atmosphere with a fission device.
                                        

                                            When Oppenheimer was made director of the new weapons laboratory at Los Alamos in early 1943,
                                            he chose Bethe to head the Theoretical Division (T Division). Following Serber's introductory lectures in early April summarizing the state of
                                            knowledge on the atomic bomb, the lab held an extended conference to analyze the scientific problems, define schedules, and detail experimental
                                            programs. On the third day, Bethe directed discussion of past measurements of physical constants, time delay,
                                            neutrons per fission cross sections and critical mass
                                            and efficiency calculations. On the tenth and last day, he discussed ways to approach critical mass gradually in experiments and
                                            thereby determine critical mass, time scale, and damage.
                                        

                                            Bethe initially did not organize T Division into groups as the other divisions were. Instead, he assigned each member to one or more of
                                            twelve projects, including the urgent critical mass and efficiency calculations, studies of uranium hydride, the Super, blast waves,
                                            and integration methods. By October 1943, however, Bethe began to subdivide T Division into groups, with Teller in charge of implosion,
                                            as well as the Super, Victor Weisskopf handling efficiency, Serber doing neutron diffusion theory, Richard Feynman uranium hydride
                                            calculations, and Donald Flanders the computational effort.
                                        

                                            In 1943 and into 1944 the main focus of Bethe's T-Division was on calculating the critical mass and developing predictions of bomb efficiency.
                                            These problems required much work, especially, on the question of how neutrons move and interact within the mass of fissionable material.
                                            But by summer 1944, it became clear that a gun-type design would not work for the plutonium bomb and implosion work assumed an urgent priority.
                                            At the same time, Bethe had grown increasingly exasperated with Teller who, as head of the implosion theory group, was working less and less on
                                            implosion and increasingly on the Super, which had a low priority since there was no chance of developing the weapon for use in the war.
                                            In June 1944, Oppenheimer, at Bethe's request, moved Teller out of T-Division and made him head of an independent group studying the Super.
                                            In his place as head of implosion, Bethe appointed Rudolf Peierls, part of the British Mission. In November, Bethe formed a new group within
                                            T-Division headed by Joseph Hirschfelder to study blast and damage. Topics examined by the group included formation and expansion of shock waves,
                                            motion and integration of the fireball, and environmental effects such as rain and fog.
                                        


                                            After the war, Bethe left Los Alamos and returned to his academic post at Cornell, taking Feynman with him. He continued to serve as an advisor
                                            on nuclear reactors and weapons work. In fall 1949, amidst the debate on whether to pursue the thermonuclear weapon, Bethe decided,
                                            after soul-searching discussions with Teller and Oppenheimer, that he would not participate in the project. The probable effects of the
                                            Super convinced him that even for the victors the world would not be worth preserving after a war with such weapons. Nonetheless,
                                            in the early 1950s he continued to advise Los Alamos efforts on developing the thermonuclear weapon. He was a vocal opponent of the 1954
                                            decision to revoke Robert Oppenheimer's security clearance. In the late 1950s he would head a National Security Council panel to consider
                                            the feasibility and desirability of a treaty banning further nuclear testing. In his scientific research, Bethe after the war contributed
                                            greatly to new understandings of nuclear physics. In 1967, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in physics "for his contributions to the theory of
                                            nuclear reactions, especially his discoveries concerning the energy production in stars." Bethe died in 2005 in Ithaca at the age of 98.
                                        


Bethe, Hans


Chadwick, James


Einstein, Albert


Fermi, Enrico


Feynman, Richard


Franck, James


Fuchs, Klaus


Rotblat, Joseph


Seaborg, Glenn T.


Serber, Robert


Szilard, Leo


Teller, Edward


Wigner, Eugene


York, Herbert




  
                                            Next







Sources and notes for this page


                                The text for this page is original to the Department of Energy's Office of History and Heritage Resources.
                                Major sources consulted include the following. Lillian Hoddeson, et. al.
                                Critical Assembly: A Technical History of Los Alamos during the Oppenheimer Years, 1943-1945 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993),
                                42-47, 75-77, 129, 162, 179, 204, 246-47, 343-45;
                                Richard G. Hewlett and Francis Duncan, Atomic Shield, 1947-1952: Volume II, A History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission (Washington: U.S. Atomic Energy
                                    Commission, 1972),
                                217, 381-82, 441, 535-36; Richard G. Hewlett and Jack M. Holl,
                                Atoms for Peace and War, 1953-1961: Eisenhower and the Atomic Energy Commission (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989),
                                93, 111, 471, 477-78, 539. Bethe quote on uranium research on the PBS American Experice,
                                Race for the Superbomb site at http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/bomb/peopleevents/pandeAMEX50.html.
                                Also see the Nobel Prize website for Bethe's biography and Nobel lecture at http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1967/bethe-bio.html,
                                and Bethe in the context of the debate over the hydrogen bomb in S.S. Schweber,
                                In the Shadow of the Bomb: Oppenheimer, Bethe and the Moral Responsibility of the Scientist (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000).
                                Bethe's portrait, his Los Alamos badge photograph and the picture of him touring with Fermi, Nick King and Teller's son Paul are courtesy
                                Los Alamos National Laboratory.
                            



Home |
                                History Office |
                                OpenNet |
                                DOE  |
                                Privacy and Security Notices

About this Site |
                                How to Navigate this Site |
                                Note on Sources |
                                Site Map |
                                Contact Us







