  
   Manhattan Project Scientists: Edward Teller (U.S. National Park Service) 















































Skip to global NPS navigation
Skip to the main content
Skip to the footer section












National Park Service




Search




Search






This Site


All NPS












Open
Menu



Close
Menu








Explore This Park



Explore the National Park Service











Exiting nps.gov




Cancel











Contact Us











Person
Manhattan Project Scientists: Edward Teller








Edward Teller is regarded as the “Father of the Hydrogen Bomb”.
LOS ALAMOS NATIONAL LABORATORY










Quick Facts





Significance:


“Father” of the hydrogen bomb






Place of Birth:


Budapest, Hungary






Date of Birth:


January 15, 1908






Place of Death:


Stanford, CA






Date of Death:


September 9, 2003








Born in Hungary in 1908, Edward Teller received his BS in chemical engineering from the University of Karlsruhe in Germany in 1928. In 1930 he received his PhD in physics from the University of Leipzig. Fearing the rise of Nazism, Teller left Germany in 1933, first to Denmark, then London, and finally the United States in 1935, joining Enrico Fermi at the University of Chicago. In 1939 Teller, along with colleagues Eugene Wigner and Leo Szilard, visited Albert Einstein’s Long Island, NY home to convince Einstein to sign a letter warning President Franklin Roosevelt of Germany’s attempt to create an atomic weapon, urging the United States to do the same. The “Einstein Letter” served as a catalyst for the creation of the Manhattan Project. In 1943 Teller traveled to Los Alamos, joining Project Y as Director of the Theoretical Division and contributing to the ultimately successful implosion method developed at the secret laboratory. Teller witnessed the Gadget detonation on July 16, 1945. After the war, and after the Soviet Union successfully detonated an atomic bomb in 1949, Teller urged President Harry Truman to develop a hydrogen bomb program which Truman approved the following year. Collaborating with mathematician Stanislaw Ulam, Teller developed the world’s first hydrogen bomb design in 1951. In 1952, the hydrogen bomb was successfully tested in the Pacific Ocean. The bomb, called the Mike Shot, was 1,000 times more powerful than the uranium bomb dropped on Hiroshima in 1945. Teller and Ulam’s hydrogen bomb design remains classified to this day. Edward Teller died in California in 2003. 


Manhattan Project National Historical Park



You Might Also Like













Loading results...










 Tags



manhattan project national historical park


scientist


people


people of los alamos


scientists and the manhattan project


jewish















Last updated: September 26, 2023
















This Site




All NPS











Download the official NPS app before your next visit

















National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior














Accessibility




Privacy Policy




FOIA




Notices




Contact The National Park Service






NPS FAQ




No Fear Act




Disclaimer




Vulnerability Disclosure Policy




USA.gov









Facebook







Youtube







Twitter







Instagram







Flickr
































