  
   Manhattan Project Scientists: J. Robert Oppenheimer (U.S. National Park Service) 















































Skip to global NPS navigation
Skip to the main content
Skip to the footer section












National Park Service




Search




Search






This Site


All NPS












Open
Menu



Close
Menu








Explore This Park



Explore the National Park Service











Exiting nps.gov




Cancel











Contact Us











Person
Manhattan Project Scientists: J. Robert Oppenheimer








J. Robert Oppenheimer led the design and development of the first atomic bombs.
LOS ALAMOS NATIONAL LABORATORY










Quick Facts





Significance:


"Father" of the Atomic Bomb






Place of Birth:


New York, NY






Date of Birth:


April 22, 1904






Place of Death:


Princeton, NJ






Date of Death:


February 18, 1967






Place of Burial:


Cremated (ashes spread in Caribbean Sea)








Born in New York City in 1904, Oppenheimer is often referred to as the “father of the atomic bomb”. A theoretical physicist, he received his PhD from Germany’s University of Gottingen in 1927 and joined the faculty at the University of California, Berkeley and Caltech the same year. In 1942, General Leslie Groves, leader of the Manhattan Project, appointed Oppenheimer to lead Site Y, the secret weapons research and development facility at Los Alamos, New Mexico. Oppenheimer served as director of the Los Alamos Laboratory until 1945. During this time, Oppenheimer led the effort to design and construct the world’s first atomic bombs, culminating with the successful Trinity test on July 16, 1945.After the war, Oppenheimer served as an advisor to the Atomic Energy Commission, worked at Caltech, and became director for the Institute of Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. In the 1950s, at the height of the communist “Red Scare”, Oppenheimer’s past perceived communist leanings and his speaking out against the development of the hydrogen bomb led the Atomic Energy Commission to revoke his security clearance, effectively ending his political influence. Oppenheimer died of throat cancer in 1967.


Manhattan Project National Historical Park



You Might Also Like













Loading results...










 Tags



manhattan project national historical park


scientist


people


people of los alamos


scientists and the manhattan project


jewish















Last updated: September 26, 2023
















This Site




All NPS











Download the official NPS app before your next visit

















National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior














Accessibility




Privacy Policy




FOIA




Notices




Contact The National Park Service






NPS FAQ




No Fear Act




Disclaimer




Vulnerability Disclosure Policy




USA.gov









Facebook







Youtube







Twitter







Instagram







Flickr
































