


Manhattan Project: Places > LOS ALAMOS: THE LABORATORY




















Events


People


Places


Processes


Science


Resources




Places

"Met Lab"(MetallurgicalLaboratory)


Oak Ridge: Clinton Engineer Works


Hanford Engineer Works


Los Alamos


Other Places







LOS ALAMOS: THE LABORATORY

Places


The Selection of Los Alamos, NM


Los Alamos Site Acquisition


The Making of Los Alamos


Main Technical Area


DP Plutonium Processing Site


Satellite Technical Areas


Scientists and Security


Los Alamos Town Site


Life at Los Alamos


Los Alamos After the War



                                            The Manhattan Project facility that finally brought all of the pieces of the puzzle together was the bomb laboratory at Los Alamos, New Mexico,
                                            also known as Project Y. In early 1942, fast-neutron research, looking toward bomb development, was dispersed at a half-dozen universities. J.
                                            Robert Oppenheimer, head of the program, concluded that a special laboratory was the only way to achieve a coordinated effort.
                                            General Leslie Groves, who assumed command of the Manhattan Engineer District in September 1942, agreed. After a brief search,
                                            Groves selected an isolated site on the east slopes of the Jemez Mountains in
                                            northern New Mexico. Acquisition of the 54,000-acre site began immediately.
                                            Most of the land was already federally owned, with the most significant privately held parcel being the Los Alamos Ranch School for Boys.
                                        

                                            The Army moved swiftly in early 1943 to make the new weapon laboratory a reality,
                                            setting up laboratories, bringing in equipment, building housing, and providing a minimum level of the accoutrements of civilization that
                                            were necessary to attract and sustain the scientists who would design, develop, and build the atomic bomb. Groves named Oppenheimer director.
                                            The research center of Los Alamos was the Main Technical Area, consisting of several dozen
                                            nondescript structures housing administrative buildings, laboratories, warehouses, and various shops and auxiliary structures behind a high
                                            chain link fence. By 1944, the transition from research to large scale development, testing, and operation involved a constant growth of
                                            personnel and a constant expansion of facilities. A fire at the C Shop in January 1945 prompted the relocation, for safety reasons,
                                            of all plutonium and polonium operations to the DP Site about two miles east of
                                            the Main Technical Area. Two dozen additional satellite areas were set up away
                                            from the main area. Reactors, critical assembly experiments, high explosives research and manufacture, gun testing, assembly of devices,
                                            and other hazardous operations were located at these isolated sites.
                                        


Security needs defined both the work and the life at Los Alamos. At the most secure of
                                            all the Manhattan Project sites, Groves' intent was to maintain as much control as he could over the scientists.
                                            Initially, he planned to make Los Alamos a military laboratory, with the scientists in uniform as military officers,
                                            but strong opposition to the militarization of the laboratory from many of the scientists Oppenheimer was attempting
                                            to recruit forced him to back down. The town site itself nonetheless
                                            became a military post and the security between the civilian lab and the outside world was no less intense.
                                            On-site accommodations and community services were provided for all military personnel and civilian scientists and technicians,
                                            as well as for their families in many cases. Life at Los Alamos, in almost every respect,
                                            was abnormal. Work and what little non-work time existed was strictly controlled. Los Alamos was surrounded by a high barbed wire fence and
                                            armed guards. Mail was censored. Scientists were not allowed personal contact with relatives nor permitted to travel more than 100 miles
                                            from Los Alamos.
                                        

After the war, the future of the laboratory remained in some doubt, but Groves felt
                                            that more and better bombs were needed, and the lab should maintain the nucleus of its weapon staff. Groves upgraded living conditions
                                            at the site with major improvements in utilities, housing, and community facilities. He also sought to focus the laboratory more on
                                            weapons development by relocating various weapons production and assembly activities away from Los Alamos.
                                        

                                            To continue with a quick overview of the Places of the Manhattan Project, jump ahead to the description of
                                            "Other Places." To learn more about Los Alamos, choose a web page from the menu below:
                                        


The Selection of Los Alamos, NM


Los Alamos Site Acquisition


The Making of Los Alamos


Main Technical Area


DP Plutonium Processing Site


Satellite Technical Areas


Scientists and Security


Los Alamos Town Site


Life at Los Alamos


Los Alamos After the War



Previous  
                                              
                                            Next







Sources and notes for this page


                                The text for this page is original to the Department of Energy's Office of History and Heritage Resources.
                                Major sources consulted include the following: Richard G. Hewlett and Oscar E. Anderson, Jr.,
                                The New World, 1939-1946: Volume I, A History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission (Washington: U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, 1972);
                                Lillian Hoddeson, et. al., Critical Assembly: A Technical History of Los Alamos during the Oppenheimer Years, 1943-1945 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993);
                                Vincent C. Jones, Manhattan: The Army and the Atomic Bomb, United States Army in World War II (Washington: Center of Military History, United States Army, 1988);
                                David Hawkins, Manhattan District History: Project Y, The Los Alamos Project, Volume I, Inception Until August 1945 (Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, LAMS-2352 [Vol. I], 1961);
                                Edith C. Truslow and Ralph Carlisle Smith, Manhattan District History: Project Y, The Los Alamos Project, Volume II, August 1945 through December 1946 (Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, LAMS-2352 [Vol. II], 1961);
                                Edith C. Truslow, with Kasha V. Thayer, ed., Manhattan District History: Nonscientific Aspects of Los Alamos Project Y, 1942 through 1946 (Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, LAMS-5200, March 1973);
                                Manhattan District History, Book VIII - Los Alamos Project (Y),
                                Volume 1 through 3. The photograph of the neutron cross section experiment is courtesy
                                of LANL, reprinted in Rachel Fermi and Esther Samra, Picturing the Bomb: Photographs from the Secret World of the Manhattan Project (New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., Publishers, 1995), 99.
                                The sketches of the gun-type and implosion
                                approaches to bomb design are reproduced from Robert Serber's April 1943 "Los Alamos Primer,"
                                21-22.
                            



Home |
                                History Office |
                                OpenNet |
                                DOE  |
                                Privacy and Security Notices

About this Site |
                                How to Navigate this Site |
                                Note on Sources |
                                Site Map |
                                Contact Us







