


Manhattan Project: Science > BOMB DESIGN AND COMPONENTS




















Events


People


Places


Processes


Science


Resources




Science
Particle Acceleratorsand OtherTechnologies
The Atomand AtomicStructure
Nuclear Physics
Bomb Design and Components
Radioactivity






BOMB DESIGN AND COMPONENTS

Science


Gun-type Design


Implosion Design


Initiators and Polonium


High Explosives


Fuzes and Detonators


Hydrogen Bomb



                                            The primary mission of the Manhattan Project was to build working atomic bombs. This required studying the physics of nuclear fission and
                                            the chemical properties of uranium and plutonium,
                                            as well as developing the industrial processes of acquiring the necessary amounts of fuel, but the ultimate success or failure of the project depended on whether or not the scientists could design a bomb in time.
                                            Weapons research was based at the new laboratory at Los Alamos, under the leadership of J. Robert Oppenheimer.
                                        


                                            A bomb design needed to hold fissile material, either uranium or plutonium, and then quickly assemble the material into a critical mass,
                                            which would then explode. From the beginning, scientists at Los Alamos proposed two basic designs: the gun-type bomb,
                                            which was more simple but could not work with plutonium fuel, and the implosion bomb, which was technically more complicated, but would work with both uranium and plutonium cores.
                                            The first atomic bomb, the Trinity test of July 16, 1945, used the implosion design, as did the bomb dropped on Nagasaki.
                                            The bomb used at Hiroshima used the gun-type design.
                                        

                                            These designs had sophisticated components, which had to be designed for the new weapons. Initiators helped trigger fission by releasing neutrons
                                            at the optimal moment, and tampers reduced critical mass by preventing neutrons from escaping the bomb core. The implosion method for the plutonium device required highly innovative usage of high
                                                    explosives.
                                            Fuzes and detonators also posed unique challenges in assuring that the bomb would detonate properly. Even a one percent failure rate was unacceptable.
                                        


                                            Bomb research nonetheless did not focus exclusively on the designs of fission weapons. Scientists as early as 1942 recognized that even more powerful bombs might be built using nuclear fusion. The idea for this "Super" bomb,
                                            or the hydrogen bomb, was pursued at Los Alamos even as the fission devices were developed.
                                        

                                            To continue with a quick overview of the Science of the Manhattan Project, jump ahead to the description of
                                            Radioactivity. To learn more about Bomb Design and Components, choose a web page from the menu below:
                                        


Gun-type Design


Implosion Design


Initiators and Polonium


High Explosives


Fuzes and Detonators


Hydrogen Bomb




Previous  
                                              
                                            Next







Sources and notes for this page



                                    The text for this page is original to the Department of Energy's Office of History and Heritage Resources. For further information, see Lillian Hoddeson, et al., Critical Assembly:
                                        A Technical History of Los Alamos during the Oppenheimer Years, 1943-1945 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993) and Richard G. Hewlett and Oscar E. Anderson, Jr., The New World, 1939-1946: Volume I, A History of the United
                                        States Atomic Energy Commission (Washington: U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, 1972). For information about the first fractions of a second of the Trinity test, click here.
                                    The sketches of the gun-type and implosion approaches to bomb design are
                                    reproduced from Robert Serber's April 1943 "Los Alamos Primer," 21-22.
                                




Home |
                                History Office |
                                OpenNet |
                                DOE  |
                                Privacy and Security Notices

About this Site |
                                How to Navigate this Site |
                                Note on Sources |
                                Site Map |
                                Contact Us








