




Manhattan Project Historic Sites | National Trust for Historic Preservation









































    Skip to main
  



        Support

        





Donate


Renew


Join









National Trust for Historic Preservation: Return to home page

 




Search





Menu


Site Navigation




    Open
  
  Save Places
  
    section of the nav
  

























                America's 11 Most Endangered Historic Places
              

                This annual list raises awareness about the threats facing some of the nation's greatest treasures.
              
 















                Join The National Trust
              

                Your support is critical to ensuring our success in protecting America's places that matter for future generations.
              
 




















                Take Action Today
              

                Tell lawmakers and decision makers that our nation's historic places matter.
              
 



          Save Places
        


PastForward National Preservation Conference


Preservation Leadership Forum


Grant Programs


National Preservation Awards


National Trust Historic Sites









    Open
  
  Explore Places
  
    section of the nav
  





























                National Trust Historic Sites
              

                Explore this remarkable collection of historic sites online.
              
 















                Places Near You
              

                Discover historic places across the nation and close to home.
              
 


























                Preservation Magazine & More
              

                Read stories of people saving places, as featured in our award-winning magazine and on our website.
              
 



          Explore Places
        


Distinctive Destinations


Guides


Historic Hotels of America


National Trust Tours


Preservation Magazine









    Open
  
  Our Work
  
    section of the nav
  


















                Saving America’s Historic Sites
              

                Discover how these unique places connect Americans to their past—and to each other.
              
 














                Telling the Full American Story
              

                Explore the diverse pasts that weave our multicultural nation together.
              
 














                Building Stronger Communities
              

                Learn how historic preservation can unlock your community's potential.
              
 




















                Investing in Preservation’s Future
              

                Take a look at all the ways we're growing the field to save places.
              
 



          About Saving Places
        


About the National Trust


African American Cultural Heritage Action Fund


Where Women Made History


National Fund for Sacred Places


Main Street America


National Trust Historic Sites


Historic Tax Credits









    Open
  
  Support
  
    section of the nav
  






















                Support the National Trust Today
              

                Make a vibrant future possible for our nation's most important places.
              
 


















                Leave A Legacy
              

                Protect the past by remembering the National Trust in your will or estate plan.
              
 






















                Support Preservation As You Shop, Travel, and Play
              

                Discover the easy ways you can incorporate preservation into your everyday life—and support a terrific cause as you go.
              
 



          Support Us Today
        


Donate


Renew


Join


Gift Memberships


Planned Giving


Leadership Giving


Monthly Giving









Donate


Renew


Join




Search

Search






            Search
          


          Search
        
 






















photo by:
      Nancy Tinker
    











Saving America's Historic Sites

Manhattan Project Historic Sites



Location:

              Los Alamos, New Mexico
            






The Manhattan Project marked one of the most transformative events in world history: the development of the atomic bombs that ended World War II and set the stage for the Cold War. While the initiative’s early focus was weapons based, additional applications for nuclear energy were later developed, leading to advances in the newly-emergent fields of chemotherapy, high-speed computer technology, genomics, and bioengineering.
















The ruined high school at Hanford, WA, a Manhattan Project site.
















The B Reactor at the Hanford Site, near Richland, WA.
















B Reactor and Tower 4 at Hanford Site.






The Manhattan Project’s three primary sites – Los Alamos, NM; Hanford, WA; and Oak Ridge, TN – speak eloquently to the project’s enormous scale and the frantic, round-the-clock effort required to create an atomic weapon ahead of the enemy. These three locations were central to the mission of the Manhattan Project, and have been selected by the National Park Service as historic sites that will comprise the Manhattan Project National Historical Park.







Campaign GoalsPartner with the Department of Energy and local officials to establish the Manhattan Project National Historical Park.






PartnersNational Parks Conservation AssociationKnox HeritageLos Alamos Historical SocietyEnergy Communities Alliance









Success!The creation of the Manhattan Project National Historical Park was accomplished on November 10, 2015.




Support our work to save places that matter.
Donate


Visit the Manhattan Project National Historical Park
Plan Your Visit







    Stay connected with us via email. Sign up today.
  


    Sign up for email updates
  


      Do not fill out this field if you are human
    


      Email Address
    



        Get Updates
      






        Sign up for email updates
      

        Email Address
      







Related Stories
















 


                      Where Women Made History
                    

                  Women's Work: Joan Hinton and the Manhattan Project




















 


                  10 Fun Historical Fiction Books to Add to Your Reading List




















 


                      Modern Architecture
                    

                  Paul Schweikher’s Pre-Midcentury Modern Chicago Home








Explore More Places















Terminal Island
Port of Los Angeles, California

 















Historic Post Office Buildings 
Nationwide, USA

 



































The Mother Road turns 100 years old in 2026—share your Route 66 story to celebrate the Centennial. Together, we’ll tell the full American story of Route 66!
Share Your Story





    Additional Info
  








        National Trust for Historic Preservation
      

        http://savingplaces.org
      
 




            600 14th Street NW
          Suite 500


          Washington,
        
          DC
        

          20005
        



          info@savingplaces.org
        






            Phone:
          

            202-588-6000
          





            Toll-Free:
          

            800-944-6847
          





            Fax:
          

            202-588-6038
          







About


Contact


Careers


Press




Donate



          Advertising
        



          Historic Real Estate
        


Partnerships






    Stay connected with us via email.
  


      Do not fill out this field if you are human
    


      Enter your email.
    



        Get Updates
      






        Stay connected with us via email.
      

        Enter your email.
      











          Facebook
        








          Twitter
        






          Instagram
        






          LinkedIn
        




    © 2024 National Trust for Historic Preservation. All Rights Reserved. The National Trust for Historic Preservation is a private 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization. The National Trust’s federal tax identification number is 53-0210807.
  


Privacy Policy


Terms of Use










