


Manhattan Project: People > NON-TECHNICAL PERSONNEL




















Events


People


Places


Processes


Science


Resources




People

Administrators


Scientists


Civilian Organizations


Military Organizations


Non-Technical Personnel







NON-TECHNICAL PERSONNEL

People


Construction


Community Administration and Operation


Health and Safety


Information Management


Production Operations



                                            Without the contributions of scientists, the Manhattan Project would not have been possible. Had scientific research not led the way,
                                            the atomic bomb would not have been conceivable. Scientists, nonetheless, only composed a small fraction of the men and women who worked
                                            on the project, and, once the Army took over the project in 1942, the development of the atomic bomb became primarily an engineering and
                                            industrial program. Scientists remained essential, but engineers in charge of designing, building, and operating massive physical plants
                                            became far more prevalent and equally as essential. Not for nothing was the Army organization assigned the task named the
                                            Manhattan Engineer District (MED).
                                        


                                            The types of personnel needed for a project of this tremendous scale covered a wide range of occupational skills.
                                            In addition to the challenge of recruiting specialized scientific personnel, was the formidable task of recruiting enough qualified
                                            carpenters, manual laborers, laboratory technicians, and even glass blowers to meet the construction
                                            and day-to-day needs of project sites. After construction phases, Manhattan Project sites still needed a tremendous quantity of personnel to
                                            sustain the buildings, operate the production equipment,
                                            administer the community, ensure the
                                            health and safety of workers and residents, and provide a myriad of special services
                                            such as information management.
                                        


                                            In terms of numbers of workers employed, the Manhattan Project was one of the nation's single largest wartime enterprises.
                                            At peak employment in June 1944, when construction was at its height, the project employed nearly 129,000 people.
                                            Of these, 84,500 were construction workers and 40,500 operating employees. The remainder consisted of almost 1,800 military personnel
                                            and an equal number of civil service employees. As construction activity declined, so did overall employment, but the project still
                                            employed over 100,000 workers. Through the end of 1946, the Oak Ridge and Hanford sites alone hired more than a half-million employees.
                                            Construction workers accounted for about two-thirds of these.
                                        

                                            By 1943, when the Manhattan Project began recruiting on a massive scale, the national competition for skilled labor was already acute.
                                            War projects across the country vied with each other for workers, with each industry citing its paramount importance in the war effort.
                                            For the Manhattan Project, the location of the major production plants in relatively remote areas with limited housing,
                                            inadequate transportation, and sparse population compounded the recruitment effort. The project would eventually attain the highest
                                            priority among wartime programs but still faced major difficulties in procuring sufficient workers to meet its needs.
                                        

                                            The same problems in attracting workers made it difficult to retain them. The number of employees leaving the project and going
                                            elsewhere was significantly above the national average. The MED and project contractors sought to work with organized labor in
                                            both recruiting and keeping workers. The MED, nonetheless, due to security requirements, placed strict limitations on union activities.
                                        

                                            To learn more about Manhattan Project personnel choose a web page from the menu below:
                                        


Construction


Community Administration and Operation


Health and Safety


Information Management


Production Operations




Previous  
                                            







Sources and notes for this page


                                The text for this page is original to the Department of Energy's Office of History and Heritage Resources.
                                The major sources consulted were the chapters on "Manpower Procurement" and "Manpower Conservation" in Vincent C. Jones,
                                Manhattan: The Army and the Atomic Bomb, United States Army in World War II (Washington: Center of Military History, United States Army, 1988),
                                344-76, and Manhattan District History, Book I - General, Volume 8 - Personnel. The photograph of the Y-12 operators at the controls is
                                courtesy the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
                                The photograph at the K-25 rally is courtesy the Department of Energy
Groves's memorandum to the Under Secretary of War can be found at the
                                National Archives and Records Administration (NARA),
                                Record Group 77 (Manhattan Engineer District), Harrison-Bundy Files, box 154, folder 80.
                            



Home |
                                History Office |
                                OpenNet |
                                DOE  |
                                Privacy and Security Notices

About this Site |
                                How to Navigate this Site |
                                Note on Sources |
                                Site Map |
                                Contact Us







