




Manhattan Project Signature Facilities


























Science

History

Resources

Media Gallery

Almanac







Search








Home
History
Manhattan Project Signature Facilities


Manhattan Project Signature Facilities


Following is the list of the Department of Energy's Manhattan Project "Signature
						Facilities" approved by the Departmental Corporate Board on Historic Preservation in December 1999.
						Taken together, the eight Signature Facilities provide the core for DOE's ability to successfully interpret,
						whether in situ or through museum or other interpretive setting, the Manhattan Project mission of developing
						atomic bombs during World War II. 
This list does not preclude protection and preservation of other historic facilities in the nuclear weapons
						complex. Just as these facilities constitute the core for DOE-wide preservation, access, and interpretation,
						sites may have site-specific signature facilities that best interpret that site's Manhattan Project mission
						from a local, state, regional, national or international perspective. 

Metallurgical Laboratory, University of Chicago (Chemistry Building and CP-1 site)
							
In August 1942, Met Lab isolated first weighable amount of plutonium. Chemistry Building
							now a National Landmark with plaque and interpretive display. On December 2, 1942, CP-1 (Fermi’s
							"pile" at Stagg Field) produced the first self-sustaining nuclear reaction. Site commemorated
							with plaque and sculpture. Argonne National Laboratory lineal descendant of Met Lab. 
X-10 Graphite Reactor, Oak Ridge 
Built in 1943, was designed as pilot for the Hanford production reactors. Produced first
							significant amounts of plutonium. A National Historic Landmark, control room and reactor face are
							accessible to the public. 
K-25 Gaseous Diffusion Process Building, Oak Ridge 
Completed in 1945, U-shaped building measures half a mile by 1,000 feet. Gaseous
							diffusion one of three isotope separations processes that provided U 235 for the Hiroshima weapon (Little
							Boy). Gaseous diffusion only uranium enrichment process used during Cold War. K-25 prototype for later Oak
							Ridge plants and those at Paducah and Portsmouth. 
Y-12 Beta-3 Racetracks, Oak Ridge 
Produced U-235 for the Hiroshima weapon. Only surviving production-level electromagnetic
							isotope separations facility in U.S. (Comparable facility in Sverdlovsk, Russia). 
B Reactor, Hanford 
Completed in 1944, was world's first large-scale plutonium production reactor. Produced
							plutonium for Trinity device, Nagasaki weapon (Fat Man), and Cold War weapons. Interior of reactor
							building currently accessible by appointment only. A National Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmark.
						
Chemical Separations Building (T Plant), Hanford 
Completed in 1944-45, separated plutonium out of production reactor fuel rods. Massive
							canyon-like structure 800 feet long, 65 feet wide, and 80 feet high. Contamination precludes access to
							interior, though interior can be viewed through closed-circuit television system. 
V-Site Assembly Building, Los Alamos 
Among last remaining Manhattan Project buildings at Los Alamos. Trinity device and later
							weapons assembled here. Other buildings at site destroyed by the Cerro Grande fire in May 2000. 
Trinity Site, Alamogordo 
July 16, 1945, test began the atomic age. Site, now owned by DOD (part of White Sands
							Missile Range), contains commemorative sign and other artifacts as well as the McDonald Ranch House and
							remnants of base camp. Currently open to public twice a year. A National Historic Landmark. 

Source: Department of Energy 



Related Sites
Argonne National Laboratory
Department of Energy: Hanford Site
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
The K-25 Virtual Museum
Related Section
The Manhattan Project: Making the Atomic
								Bomb











© 1998-2023 All Rights Reserved




About Us
							· Comments and Questions
							· Privacy
							· Site Map
							· Support Our Site








