


Manhattan Project: People > Scientists




















Events


People


Places


Processes


Science


Resources




People

Administrators


Scientists


Civilian Organizations


Military Organizations


Non-Technical Personnel







Scientists
People




Bethe, Hans


Chadwick, James


Einstein, Albert


Fermi, Enrico


Feynman, Richard


Franck, James


Fuchs, Klaus


Rotblat, Joseph


Seaborg, Glenn T.


Serber, Robert


Szilard, Leo


Teller, Edward


Wigner, Eugene


York, Herbert



                                            The scientists participating in the Manhattan Project represented some of the giants of the twentieth century.
                                            As the historian Helge Kragh has noted, of the great physicists of the Europe and the United States,
                                            "It would perhaps be easier to list those who did not [participate]," than those who did. In this respect,
                                            the Manhattan Project was unique. Never before or since have so many of the world's top scientists been brought
                                            together in a time-constrained effort to reach a focused, utilitarian goal.
                                        

                                            Scientists played pivotal roles throughout the Manhattan Project. The Hungarian émigré theoretical physicists
                                            Leo Szilard and Edward Teller convinced Albert Einstein to write his letter to
                                            President Franklin Roosevelt in 1939
                                            that initiated the government-supported research that would lead to the Manhattan Project.
                                            From 1939 to 1942, scientists laboring at numerous academic institutions and laboratories and coordinated by scientist-administrators such as
                                            Vannevar Bush and James Conant provided the research that determined that not only was an atomic bomb possible but that it could be
                                            built in
                                            time to have an impact on the Second World War. Even after the Army took control in 1942 of what was now primarily an industrial
                                            and engineering project, scientists played an indispensable part, manning and managing the ongoing research efforts,
                                            especially at the Los Alamos laboratory that developed and produced the bomb itself.
                                        


                                            Many of the individuals central to the technical success of the Manhattan Project had in the previous decades contributed to the rise of modern
                                            physics, including quantum mechanics and nuclear physics. Niels Bohr, Arthur Compton,
                                            James Chadwick, Einstein, Enrico Fermi,
                                            James Franck, and Ernest Lawrence all had been awarded Nobel Prizes in physics prior to the Manhattan Project.
                                            The physicist Isidor Rabi was awarded the Nobel Prize in in 1944. The physicists Luis Alvarez,
                                            Hans Bethe, Richard Feynman, Emilio Segrè,
                                            and Eugene Wigner, and the chemist Glenn Seaborg, would all win Nobel Prizes over the next several decades.
                                            And one Los Alamos alumni, physicist Joseph Rotblat, would win the Nobel Peace Prize in 1995 for his efforts toward nuclear arms control and
                                            diminishing the global threat posed by the weapons he helped develop during the war.
                                        

                                            Foreign and émigré scientists provided significant contributions to the success of the Manhattan Project. During the interwar period Europe was
                                            the center of new developments in physics, and European universities, especially in Germany, were where many bright American students went to get
                                            graduate training. Yet, soon after coming to power, the Nazis purged German Universities of Jewish scholars. By 1936 more than 1,600 academics
                                            were forced out of their positions, about one-third of which were scientists, including the world-famous Einstein. Many displaced scholars found
                                            new positions in the United States. By 1941 more than 100 physicists fleeing Europe, including eight past and future Nobel Laureates,
                                            found academic positions in the United States. Szilard, Teller, Bethe, Franck, and Wigner all left their posts in German universities
                                            and crossed the Atlantic. Fermi and his wife chose not to return to fascist Italy after accepting his Nobel Prize in Sweden and instead
                                            boarded a ship bound for the United States. Segrè was on a visit to the United States in 1938 when anti-Semitic laws prevented his return to Italy.
                                        

                                            Not all foreign scientists who worked on the Manhattan Project were émigrés. Scientists in British laboratories were heavily engaged in early
                                            research leading to the 1941 Maud Report that played a key role in convincing Bush and Conant to move forward with the bomb project.
                                            In December 1943, the first of twenty-one scientists arrived at Los Alamos as part of the British Mission.
                                            Chadwick led the group of British scientists who worked alongside American and émigré scientists. Rotblat, a Polish physicist working in England
                                            when the war broke out, also was part of the British contingent, as was the German émigré Klaus Fuchs, whose wartime work,
                                            it would be revealed years later, included passing information to the Soviet Union.
                                        


                                            Although the Manhattan Project benefited greatly from the contributions European scientists, native-grown talent was highly capable.
                                            By the time of the Second World War, America already had developed (or the capacity to develop) academic and industrial laboratories and resources,
                                            funding sources, and a community of scientists that made the project possible. American born scientists such as Compton, Seaborg, Lawrence,
                                            Robert Oppenheimer, and Robert Serber,
                                            became central players in the science and administration of the Manhattan Project, while a younger
                                            generation of American born Manhattan Project physicists such as Feynman and Herbert York,
                                            went on to illustrious careers in science and science policy after the war.
                                        

                                            The vast majority of scientists who worked on the Manhattan Project were neither internationally noteworthy nor past or future Nobel
                                            Prize winners. Most labored in relative obscurity on their own particular piece of the project at laboratories scattered across the country.
                                            Their contributions were nonetheless essential to the ultimate success of the project. In addition, scientists were a small fraction of
                                            the total Manhattan Project workforce. Once the Army took control, engineers in particular formed the core group of experts that brought
                                            together the scientific and industrial complex and made it work. Not for nothing was the project organized and run by the Manhattan Engineer
                                            District.
                                        

                                            To continue with a quick overview of People of the Manhattan Project, jump ahead to the description of Civilian Organizations.
                                            To learn more about any of these scientists, choose a web page from the menu below:
                                        


Bethe, Hans


Chadwick, James


Einstein, Albert


Fermi, Enrico


Feynman, Richard


Franck, James


Fuchs, Klaus


Rotblat, Joseph


Seaborg, Glenn T.


Serber, Robert


Szilard, Leo


Teller, Edward


Wigner, Eugene


York, Herbert




Previous  
                                              
                                            Next







Sources and notes for this page


                                The text for this page is original to the Department of Energy's Office of History and Heritage Resources.
                                Major sources consulted include the following. Helge Kragh Quantum Generations: a History of Physics in the Twentieth Century (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1999).
                                The statistics on émigré scientists and a useful discussion of their experiences appears in Daniel J. Kevles,
                                The Physicists: The History of a Scientific Community in Modern America (Harvard: Harvard University Press, 2005), pages 280-81.
                                In this book Kevles also discusses the importance of existing American scientific talent and institutions to the Manhattan Project, p. 283.
                                On the British Mission to Los Alamos, see Dennis C. Fakley, "The British Mision", in Los Alamos Science 40th Anniversary Edition.
                                The photograph of Ernest Lawrence, Enrico Fermi, and Isidore Rabi is courtesy Los Alamos National Laboratory.
                                The photograph of the CP-1 alumni is courtesy of the Department of Energy. The image of Los Alamos scientists attending an August 1946 colloquium is courtesy Los Alamos National Laboratory. In the audience at the colloquium are left to right, first row: Norris E.
                                Bradbury, John H. Manley, Enrico Fermi, J. M. B. Kellogg. Second row: Robert Oppenheimer, Richard P. Feynman, Phil B. Porter. Third row: Gregory Breit (partially hidden), Arthur Hemmendinger, and Arthur D. Schelberg.
                            



Home |
                                History Office |
                                OpenNet |
                                DOE  |
                                Privacy and Security Notices

About this Site |
                                How to Navigate this Site |
                                Note on Sources |
                                Site Map |
                                Contact Us







