


Manhattan Project: Espionage and the Manhattan Project, 1940-1945


















Events


People


Places


Processes


Science


Resources




Time Periods
1890s-1939:
                                    Atomic Discoveries
1939-1942:
                                    Early 
                                    Government Support
1942:
                                    Difficult 
                                    Choices
1942-1944:
                                    The Uranium 
                                    Path to
                                    the Bomb
1942-1944:
                                    The Plutonium 
                                    Path to
                                    the Bomb
1942-1945:
                                    Bringing It All Together
1945:
                                    Dawn of the 
                                    Atomic Era
1945-present:
                                    Postscript -- 
                                    The Nuclear Age








ESPIONAGE AND THE MANHATTAN PROJECT
(1940-1945)

Events >
Bringing It All Together, 1942-1945



Establishing
                                                        Los Alamos, 1942-1943
Early Bomb Design,
                                                        1943-1944
Basic Research at Los
                                                        Alamos, 1943-1944
Implosion
                                                        Becomes a Necessity, 1944
Oak Ridge and Hanford
                                                        Come Through, 1944-1945
Final Bomb Design,
                                                        1944-1945
Atomic Rivals and the ALSOS
                                                        Mission, 1938-1945
Espionage and the
                                                        Manhattan Project, 1940-1945

Security was a way of life for the Manhattan Project.  The goal was
                                            to keep the entire atomic bomb program secret from Germany and Japan. 
                                            In this, Manhattan Project security
                                                officials succeeded.  They also sought, however, to keep word
                                            of the atomic bomb from reaching the Soviet Union.  Although an ally of
                                            Britain and the United States in the war against Germany, the Soviet Union
                                            remained a repressive dictatorship and a potential future enemy. 
                                            Here, security officials were less successful.  Soviet spies
                                            penetrated the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos and several other locations,
                                            sending back to Russia critical information that helped speed the
                                            development of the Soviet bomb.
The
                                            theoretical possibility of developing an atomic bomb was not a
                                            secret.  Fission had
                                                been discovered in Berlin, and word of the breakthrough had spread
                                            quickly around the world.  The scientific basis for a sustained, or
                                            even explosive, chain reaction
                                            was now clear to any well-versed research physicist.  Most physicists
                                            initially may have thought an explosive chain reaction unlikely, but the
                                            possibility could not be entirely discounted.
With an atomic bomb program of its own,
                                            Germany attempted to build a large spy network within the United
                                            States.  Most German spies were quickly caught, however, and none
                                            penetrated the veil of secrecy surrounding the Manhattan Project. 
                                            German physicists heard rumors and suspected an atomic bomb project was
                                            underway in Britain, the United States, or both, but that was all. 
                                            Japan also had a modest atomic research
                                                program.  Rumors of the Manhattan Project reached Japan as
                                            well, but, as with Germany, no Japanese spies penetrated the Manhattan
                                            Project.  
The
                                            Soviet Union proved more adept at espionage, primarily because it was able
                                            to play on the ideological sympathies of a significant number of Americans
                                            and British as well as foreign émigrés.  Soviet intelligence services
                                            devoted a tremendous amount of resources into spying on the United States
                                            and Britain.  In the United States alone, hundreds of Americans
                                            provided secret information to the Soviet Union, and the quality of Soviet
                                            sources in Britain was even better.  (In contrast, during the war
                                            neither the American nor the British secret services had a single agent in
                                            Moscow.)  The Communist Party of the United States of America (CPUSA)
                                            had thousands of members, a disproportionate number of whom were highly
                                            educated and likely to work in sensitive wartime industries.  Many
                                            physicists were members of the CPUSA before the war.  This does not
                                            mean that every member of the CPUSA was willing to supply secret information
                                            to the Soviet Union, but some were and some did.  
Soviet
                                            intelligence first learned of Anglo-American talk of an atomic bomb program
                                            in September 1941, almost a year before the Manhattan
                                                Engineer District (MED) was created.  The information likely
                                            came from John Cairncross, a member of the
                                            infamous "Cambridge Five" spies in Britain. (Cairncross
                                            served as a private secretary for a British government official, Lord Hankey, who was privy to some British discussions of
                                            the MAUD Report.)  Another
                                            of the "Cambridge Five," Donald Maclean (left), also sent word of
                                            the potential for an atomic bomb to his Soviet handlers around the same
                                            time.  (Maclean was a key Soviet agent.  In 1947 and 1948, he
                                            served as a British liaison with the MED's
                                            successor, the Atomic Energy Commission.)  At the same time, the
                                            sudden drop in fission-related publications emerging from Britain and the
                                            United States caught the attention of Georgii Flerov, a young Soviet physicist, 
                                            who in April 1942 wrote directly to Josef Stalin to warn him of the
                                            danger.  
Soviet intelligence soon recognized the importance of
                                            the subject and gave it the appropriate codename: ENORMOZ
                                            ("enormous").  Soviet intelligence headquarters in Moscow
                                            pressured their various American residencies to develop sources within the
                                            Manhattan Project.  Many of these early attempts at recruiting spies were
                                            detected and foiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and
                                            Manhattan Project counterintelligence officials.  In February 1943,
                                            they learned of Soviet attempts to contact physicists conducting related
                                            work at the "Rad Lab" at the University of California, Berkeley. 
                                            The scientists in question were placed under surveillance and, when
                                            possible, drafted into the military so that they could be assigned away
                                            from sensitive subjects.  Another scientist at the Rad
                                            Lab caught passing information to the Soviet Union in 1944 was immediately
                                            discharged.  In early 1944, the FBI also learned of several "Met Lab" employees
                                            suspected of divulging secret information to their Soviet handlers. 
                                            The employees were immediately dismissed.  While these Soviet attempts
                                            at espionage were discovered and thwarted, other Soviet spies went
                                            undetected.  
Of the Soviet spies not caught during the war, one of the most valuable
                                            was the British physicist Klaus Fuchs. 
                                            Fuchs first offered his services to Soviet intelligence in late 1941. Soon
                                            thereafter, he began passing information regarding British atomic
                                            research.  Soviet intelligence lost contact with him in early 1944 but
                                            eventually found out that Fuchs had been reassigned to the bomb research and
                                                development laboratory at Los Alamos as part of the newly-arrived
                                            contingent of British scientists.  Fuchs worked in the Theoretical
                                            Division at Los Alamos, and from there he passed to his Soviet handlers detailed information regarding atomic weapons
                                                design.  Returning home to begin work on the British atomic program in
                                                1946, he continued to pass secret information to the Soviet Union
                                                intermittently until he was finally caught (largely due to VENONA), and in January 1950
                                                he confessed everything.
For over four
                                                decades, Klaus Fuchs was thought to be the only spy who was a physicist at
                                                Los Alamos.  In the mid-1990s, release of the VENONA intercepts
                                                revealed an alleged second scientist-spy: Theodore Hall.  Like Fuchs,
                                                a long-time communist who volunteered his services, Hall made contact with
                                                Soviet intelligence in November 1944 while at Los Alamos.  Although
                                                not as detailed or voluminous as that provided by Fuchs, the data supplied
                                                by Hall on implosion
                                                and other aspects of atomic weapons design served as an important
                                                supplement and confirmation of Fuchs's material.  The FBI learned of
                                                Hall's espionage in the early 1950s.  Unlike Fuchs, however, under
                                                questioning Hall refused to admit anything.  The American government was
                                                unwilling to expose the VENONA secret in open court.  Hall's espionage
                                                activities had apparently ended by then, so the matter was quietly dropped.
The most famous "atomic
                                                spies," Julius and Ethel Rosenberg (right), never worked for the
                                                Manhattan Project.  Julius Rosenberg was an American engineer who by
                                                the end of the war had been heavily involved in industrial espionage for
                                                years, both as a source himself and as the "ringleader" of a
                                                network of like-minded engineers dispersed throughout the country. 
                                                Julius's wife, the former Ethel Greenglass, was
                                                also a devoted communist, as was her brother David.  David Greenglass was an Army machinist, and in the summer of
                                                1944 he was briefly assigned to Oak Ridge.  After a
                                                few weeks, he was transferred to Los Alamos, where he worked on implosion
                                                as a member of the Special
                                                    Engineering Detachment.  Using his wife Ruth as the conduit, Greenglass soon began funneling information regarding
                                                the atomic bomb to his brother-in-law, Julius Rosenberg, who then turned it
                                                over to Soviet intelligence.  As Greenglass
                                                later explained, "I was young, stupid, and immature, but I was a good
                                                Communist."  
In
                                                March 1946, Greenglass left the Army. 
                                                Soviet intelligence maintained contact with him, urging him to enroll at
                                                the University of Chicago in order to re-enter atomic research. The NKGB
                                                (the People's Commissary for State Security and the predecessor to the KGB)
                                                offered to pay his tuition, but Greenglass's
                                                application to Chicago was rejected.  In 1950, the confession of Klaus
                                                Fuchs led the FBI to his handler, Harry Gold, who in turn led the FBI to
                                                David Greenglass.  When confronted, Greenglass confessed, implicating his wife Ruth and his
                                                brother-in-law, Julius Rosenberg.  This was soon confirmed through
                                                VENONA intercepts (Rosenberg was codenamed ANTENNA and LIBERAL, Ethel was
                                                WASP, Greenglass was BUMBLEBEE and CALIBER, and
                                                his wife Ruth was OSA).  The "rolling up" of the espionage
                                                ring stopped, however, with the Rosenbergs. 
                                                Julius and Ethel (who knew of her husband's activities and at times
                                                assisted him) both maintained their innocence and refused to cooperate with
                                                authorities in order to lessen their sentences.  Because of his
                                                cooperation, Greenglass received only 15 years,
                                                and his wife, Ruth, was never formally charged.  The Rosenbergs were sentenced to death.  Authorities
                                                apparently hoped to use the death sentences as leverage to get them to name
                                                names, but the Rosenbergs maintained their
                                                silence.  Despite a worldwide campaign for clemency, Julius and Ethel
                                                Rosenberg were executed on June 19, 1953.
At least two other scientists associated with the Manhattan Project also
                                                served as spies for Soviet Union: Allan Nunn May and Bruno Pontecorvo.  Another British physicist who came
                                                over with James
                                                    Chadwick in 1943, May, unlike his colleague Klaus Fuchs, was not
                                                assigned to Los Alamos.  Instead, he was chosen to assist in the
                                                Canadian effort to construct a heavy water-moderated reactor
                                                at Chalk River, Ontario.  During 1944, May visited the Met Lab several
                                                times.  Once during these visits, he even met Leslie Groves. 
                                                In February 1945, May passed what he had learned to Soviet
                                                intelligence.  His colleague at Chalk River, Bruno Pontecorvo,
                                                also served as a spy.  Pontecorvo was a
                                                former protégé of Enrico Fermi.  In 1936, Pontecorvo, who was Jewish, fled fascist Italy for
                                                France.  When France fell to the invading Nazi armies in 1940, Pontecorvo was again forced to flee fascism.  He
                                                was invited to join British atomic research, and by 1943 he found himself
                                                assigned to the Chalk River facility.  Pontecorvo
                                                established contact with Soviet intelligence and began passing them
                                                information about the atomic activities there.  He continued his dual
                                                life as a physicist and a spy in Canada until 1949 when he was promoted and
                                                moved back to Britain to join the atomic research being conducted
                                                there.  Following the arrest of Klaus Fuchs, Pontecorvo's
                                                Soviet handlers became worried that he would be exposed, and in 1950 Pontecorvo defected with his family to the Soviet
                                                Union.  Pontecorvo continued his work as a
                                                physicist in the Soviet Union, eventually receiving two Orders of Lenin for
                                                his efforts, all the while continuing to deny that he had been a spy during
                                                his years in Canada and Britain.  
A number of spies within the Manhattan Project have
                                                never been positively identified.  Most are only known by their
                                                codenames, as revealed in the VENONA decrypts.  One source, an
                                                engineer or scientist who was given the codename FOGEL (later changed to
                                                PERSEUS), apparently worked on the fringes of the Manhattan Project for
                                                several years, passing along what information he could.  Soviet
                                                documents state that he was offered employment at Los Alamos, but, to the
                                                regret of his handlers, he turned it down for family reasons.  Another
                                                source, a physicist codenamed MAR, first began supplying information to the
                                                Soviet Union in 1943.  In October of that year, he was transferred to
                                                the Hanford Engineer Works. 
                                                In another case, a stranger one day in the summer of 1944 showed up
                                                unannounced at the Soviet Consulate in New York, dropped off a package, and
                                                quickly left.  The package was later found to contain numerous secret
                                                documents relating to the Manhattan Project.  Soviet intelligence
                                                attempted to find out who the deliverer of the package was so that they
                                                could recruit him.  They never could, however, determine his
                                                identity.  An Englishman codenamed ERIC also provided details of
                                                atomic research in 1943, as did an American source codenamed QUANTUM, who
                                                provided secret information relating to gaseous
                                                    diffusion in the summer of 1943.  Who QUANTUM was or what
                                                became of him after the summer of 1943 remains a mystery.  
Few aspects of the Manhattan Project
                                                remained secret from the Soviet Union for long.  Given the size of the
                                                pre-existing Soviet espionage network within the United States and the
                                                number of Americans who were sympathetic to communism or even members of
                                                the CPUSA themselves, it seems highly unlikely in retrospect that
                                                penetrations of the Manhattan Project could have been prevented.  In
                                                most cases, the individuals who chose to provide information to the Soviet
                                                Union did so for ideological reasons, not for money.  They were usually
                                                volunteers who approached Soviet intelligence themselves.  Further, in
                                                most cases, they were not aware that anyone else had chosen to do the same
                                                thing.  (Fuchs, Greenglass, and Hall were
                                                all at Los Alamos at the same time, yet none of them knew of the espionage
                                                activities of the other two.)  
Soviet espionage directed at the Manhattan Project probably hastened by
                                                at least 12-18 months the Soviet acquisition of an atomic bomb.  When
                                                the Soviet Union conducted its first nuclear test on August 29, 1949 (left),
                                                the device they used was virtually identical in design to the one that had
                                                been tested at Trinity four years
                                                previously.
To view the next "event" of
                                                the Manhattan Project, proceed to "1945:
                                                        Dawn of the Atomic Era."

Establishing
                                                            Los Alamos, 1942-1943
Early Bomb Design,
                                                            1943-1944
Basic Research at Los
                                                            Alamos, 1943-1944
Implosion
                                                            Becomes a Necessity, 1944
Oak Ridge and Hanford
                                                            Come Through, 1944-1945
Final Bomb Design,
                                                            1944-1945
Atomic Rivals and the ALSOS
                                                            Mission, 1938-1945
Espionage and the
                                                            Manhattan Project, 1940-1945

Previous    Next

Sources and notes for this page.
The text for this page is original to the
                                                    Department of Energy's Office
                                                        of History and Heritage Resources.  The main sources for this
                                                    entry were:

Christopher Andrew and Vasili
                                                        Mitrokhin, The Sword and the Shield: The Mitrokhin Archive and the Secret History of the
                                                            KGB (New York: Basic Books, 1999);
John Earl Haynes and Harvey Klehr,
                                                        Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage
                                                            in America (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1999);
David Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet
                                                            Union and Atomic Energy, 1939-1956 (New Haven, CT: Yale University
                                                        Press, 1994);
Jeffrey T. Richelson, A
                                                            Century of Spies: Intelligence in the Twentieth Century (New York:
                                                        Oxford University Press, 1995); and
Allen Weinstein and Alexander Vassiliev,
                                                        The Haunted Wood: Soviet Espionage
                                                            in America -- the Stalin Era (New York: Random House, 1999).

For a summary of the failure of German
                                                    espionage in the United States (and in Britain), see Richelson,
                                                    Century of Spies, 139-144.
On the scope of Soviet espionage in the
                                                    United States in general, see Andrew and Mitrokhin,
                                                    Sword and Shield; Haynes and Klehr, Venona; and Weinstein and Vassiliev,
                                                    Haunted Wood.
On Cairncross as
                                                    the source of the first word on atomic energy to reach Moscow, see
                                                    Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb, 82-83; Andrew and Mitrokhin,
                                                    Sword and Shield, 114; and Weinstein and Vassiliev,
                                                    Haunted Wood, 172.  Cairncross may
                                                    have passed word as early as October 1940; see Richelson,
                                                    Century of Spies, 136.  In 1993, Cairncross
                                                    denied to the Schecters ever having passed this
                                                    information (Jerrold and Leona Schecter, Sacred
                                                        Secrets: How Soviet Intelligence Operations Changed American History
                                                    (Washington: Brassey's, 2002), 348 (note
                                                    5)).  On Maclean passing word of the atomic bomb program in the fall
                                                    of 1941, see Richelson, Century of Spies,
                                                    137.  On Maclean in general, including his work with the AEC, see
                                                    Haynes and Klehr, Venona,
                                                    52-55.  On the Flerov letter, see Holloway, Stalin
                                                        and the Bomb, 76-79.
On the name "ENORMOZ," see
                                                    Andrew and Mitrokhin, Sword and Shield,
                                                    118.  For those Soviet intelligence operations that were detected and
                                                    stopped, see Vincent C. Jones, Manhattan: The Army and the Atomic Bomb,
                                                    United States Army in World War II (Washington: Center of Military History,
                                                    United States Army, 1988), 263-266, and Haynes and Klehr,
                                                    Venona, 325-326.
For the sources consulted regarding Klaus Fuchs and Theodore
                                                        Hall, see the notes for their separate entries (Fuchs' notes; Hall's
                                                        notes).
The information on the Rosenbergs
                                                    and David Greenglass is from Andrew and Mitrokhin, Sword and Shield, 128; Haynes and Klehr, Venona,
                                                    295-303, 307-311; and Weinstein and Vassiliev, Haunted
                                                        Wood, 198-202, 205-216, 221-222, 327-334.
The information on May is from Holloway, Stalin
                                                        and the Bomb, 105.  On Pontecorvo, see
                                                    Christopher Andrew and Oleg Gordievsky, KGB:
                                                        The Inside Story of Its Foreign Operations from Lenin to Gorbachev (New
                                                    York: HarperCollins, 1990), 317-318, 379.
On FOGEL/PERSEUS, see Weinstein and Vassiliev, Haunted Wood, 190-195, and Haynes and
                                                    Klehr, Venona,
                                                    16, 313-314.  Before Theodore Hall was identified, FOGEL/PERSEUS was
                                                    sometimes mistakenly thought to be the source that turned out to be
                                                    Hall.  On MAR, see Andrew and Mitrokhin, Sword
                                                        and Shield, 117.  On the strange "walk-in" in New York,
                                                    see Weinstein and Vassiliev, Haunted Wood,
                                                    193.  On ERIC, see ibid., 181-182, and on
                                                    QUANTUM, see Haynes and Klehr, Venona, 311-313.
For estimates of how many years Soviet
                                                    espionage sped up their atomic weapons program, see Andrew and Mitrokhin, Sword and Shield, 132, and Holloway, Stalin
                                                        and the Bomb, 222.
The Los Alamos ID Badge photograph
                                                    of Fuchs was taken in 1944; it is courtesy the Los
                                                        Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) and is reprinted in Rachel Fermi and
                                                    Esther Samra, Picturing the Bomb: Photographs
                                                        from the Secret World of the Manhattan Project (New York: Harry N.
                                                    Abrams, Inc., Publishers, 1995), 106.  The photograph of Werner
                                                    Heisenberg is courtesy the National
                                                        Archives (NARA); it is reprinted in Jeremy Bernstein, ed., Hitler's
                                                        Uranium Club: The Secret Recordings at Farm Hall (Woodbury, NY:
                                                    American Institute of Physics, 1996).  The photograph of Hall and the
                                                    photograph of Donald Maclean are courtesy the National
                                                        Security Agency.  The photographs of David and Ruth Greenglass, Julius Rosenberg, and Ethel Rosenberg, are
                                                    all courtesy the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York (via
                                                    NARA).  Click here for
                                                            more information on the photograph of Kasparov, Kamen,
                                                            and Kheifits.  The
                                                    "Silence Means Security" propaganda poster is courtesy the Office
                                                    of Government Reports, United States Information Service, Division of
                                                    Public Inquiry, Bureau of Special Services, Office of War Information (via
                                                    NARA).  The photograph of the first Soviet atomic test is courtesy the
                                                    Federation of American Scientists.
  Home | History
                                                            Office  | OpenNet | DOE  | Privacy and Security Notices
About this Site |  How to Navigate this Site | Note on Sources | 
                                                            Site Map | Contact Us











