  
   Manhattan Project Scientists: Enrico Fermi (U.S. National Park Service) 















































Skip to global NPS navigation
Skip to the main content
Skip to the footer section












National Park Service




Search




Search






This Site


All NPS












Open
Menu



Close
Menu








Explore This Park



Explore the National Park Service











Exiting nps.gov




Cancel











Contact Us











Person
Manhattan Project Scientists: Enrico Fermi








Enrico Fermi developed the world's first nuclear reactor.
US DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY










Quick Facts





Significance:


Creator of the World's First Nuclear Reactor (CP-1)






Place of Birth:


Rome, Italy






Date of Birth:


September 29, 1901






Place of Death:


Chicago, IL






Date of Death:


November 28, 1954






Place of Burial:


Chicago, IL






Cemetery Name:


Oak Woods Cemetery








Born in Rome, Italy in 1901, Fermi received his PhD in Physics from the University of Pisa in 1922. In 1927, he became Professor of Theoretical Physics at the University of Rome. It was here in 1934 that Fermi and his colleagues split uranium without fully realizing it, researched nuclear transformation, and discovered slow neutrons, which aided in the discovery of nuclear fission. For these efforts, Fermi won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1938. That same year, to escape fascist Italy under Benito Mussolini, Fermi and his family left for the United States.In 1942, Fermi developed the Chicago Pile (CP-1) at the University of Chicago. An experimental nuclear reactor, CP-1 went critical on December 2, 1942. After this breakthrough, Fermi was recruited by J. Robert Oppenheimer to be associate director at Los Alamos. Fermi was the first person to insert a uranium slug into the B Reactor at Hanford. He was present when the X-10 Graphite Reactor went critical at Oak Ridge and witnessed the Trinity test in the New Mexico desert.After the war, Fermi became a professor at the University of Chicago, dying of stomach cancer in 1954.


Manhattan Project National Historical Park



You Might Also Like













Loading results...










 Tags



manhattan project national historical park


scientist


people


people of hanford


scientists and the manhattan project















Last updated: January 11, 2023
















This Site




All NPS











Download the official NPS app before your next visit

















National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior














Accessibility




Privacy Policy




FOIA




Notices




Contact The National Park Service






NPS FAQ




No Fear Act




Disclaimer




Vulnerability Disclosure Policy




USA.gov









Facebook







Youtube







Twitter







Instagram







Flickr
































