


Manhattan Project: People > Military Organizations > INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY




















Events


People


Places


Processes


Science


Resources




People

Administrators


Scientists


Civilian Organizations


Military Organizations


Non-Technical Personnel







INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY

(Manhattan Engineer District, 1942-1946)

People > Military Organizations


Army Corps of Engineers


Intelligence and Security


Military Police


Special Engineering Detachment (SED)


Women's Army Corps (WAC)



                                            Security was paramount in the Manhattan Project. With an awareness of the tremendous military potential of the atomic bomb and reports of German research,
                                            the recognition of the need for maintaining a high level of secrecy pervaded the program. This recognition went all the way to the top. In March 1942, when
                                            Vannevar Bush told President Franklin Roosevelt
                                            that the atomic bomb program could be turned over to the Army by summer, the President replied that he had no objection as long as Bush was satisfied that the Army had made
                                            adequate provision for absolute secrecy. Again, on June 29, 1943, a concerned Roosevelt sent a letter to Robert Oppenheimer
                                            for distribution to the scientists as the new Los Alamos laboratory emphasizing that
                                        


                                                The fact that the outcome of your labors is of such great significance to the nation requires that this program be even more drastically
                                                guarded than other highly secret war development. I have therefore given directions that every precaution be taken to insure the security
                                                of your project and feel sure that those in charge will see that these orders are carried out. You are fully aware of the reasons why your
                                                endeavors and those of your associates must be circumscribed by very special restrictions.
                                            


                                            Esseentially the same letter went to General Leslie Groves with the request that
                                            he convey its contents to the other project leaders.
                                        

                                            Efforts to preserve the secrecy of work on the atomic bomb pre-dated the 1942 establishment of the Manhattan Engineer District (MED).
                                            Indeed, one of the main reasons the atomic bomb project was given to the Army in 1942 was the belief that it could enforce secrecy better
                                            than could a civilian agency. Following the outbreak of war in Europe, Leo Szilard
                                            and others convinced the scientific community within the United States to voluntarily refrain from publishing papers that might aid a foreign
                                            atomic bomb program. This self-censorship was formalized in April 1940, and in June the responsibility for security measures fell onto the
                                            shoulders of the newly created National Defense Research Committee. Security measures
                                            remained modest, however, until the formation of the MED.
                                        


                                            The initial security system in the MED resembled that in other engineer districts. Under Army regulations, the program was limited to routine
                                            local security requirements. Broader issues, such as espionage, counterespionage, and sabatoge, were under the domain of the War Department's
                                            Military Intelligence Division (G-2) in conjunction with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Accordingly, when Colonel James Marshall was
                                            appointed to head up the Army's atomic bomb effort in June 1942, he formed the Protective Security Section focusing on personnel, plant,
                                            and military information security. Marshall arranged for security liaison with G-2, which assigned counterintelligence responsibility
                                            for the atomic project to Major John Lansdale, Jr. Since the project was without geographic limitation within the U.S., Lansdale put
                                            together a team of officers from various regions reporting directly to him and a quasi-clandestine counterintelligence group.
                                            Lansdale, in turn, reported directly to Groves, who took over from Marshall in September. Lansdale's group was answerable to Groves in all
                                            substantive respects, even though it functioned from the G-2 office in the Pentagon.
                                        

                                            As the MED's activities, personnel requirements, and physical footprint rapidly evolved, the security program expanded and centralized within
                                            the MED. In July 1943, protective security and intelligence functions were combined in an MED Intelligence and Security Section at the MED's
                                            new administrative headquarters at the Oak Ridge site. In December 1943, Groves moved
                                            Lansdale's unit into the MED, with Lansdale securing authorization to establish a special Counterintelligence Corps (CIC) Detachment.
                                            The shift of all project counterintelligence activities to the MED resulted in an upgrade of the Intelligence and Security Section to
                                            a division in February 1944 under Lt. Colonel William B. Parsons. Although Parsons officially reported to Colonel Kenneth D. Nichols,
                                            district engineer and Groves' second in command, he personally kept Groves appraised of all developments. At the same time, Groves brought
                                            Lansdale into his Washington office as his special assistant for security affairs. By January 1945, Parsons' Intelligence and Security
                                            Division had become a highly centralized unit divided into six separate branches.
                                        


                                            The Counterintelligence Corps's first line of defense was screening individuals seeking work on the atomic bomb. Such screening consisted of a
                                            thorough background check, including interviews with applicants, and questioning of friends and family members. The most common grounds
                                            for rejection were close association with political organizations or foreign nations deemed hostile to the United States.
                                            Applicants were also frequently rejected if there was something in their background that was thought to make them susceptible to blackmail,
                                            such as having family members still living in Axis-controlled areas.
                                        

                                            Military intelligence continued to keep tabs on individuals even after they were initially cleared for secret work. Special undercover CIC
                                            agents were interspersed throughout the facilities, tasked with keeping an eye on their fellow employees. Permanent surveillance squads
                                            also took turns following employees thought to be security risks. As one early Los Alamos resident recalled, "I couldn't go to Santa
                                            Fe without being aware of hidden eyes upon me, watching, waiting to pounce on that inevitable misstep. It wasn't a pleasant feeling."
                                            Wiretaps and other listening devices were also used by security officials as they posed as hotel clerks, tourists, electricians,
                                            and whatever else they had to in order to monitor their subject.
                                        


Army Corps of Engineers


Intelligence and Security


Military Police


Special Engineering Detachment (SED)


Women's Army Corps (WAC)




Previous  
                                              
                                            Next







Sources and notes for this page


                                The text for this page is original to the Department of Energy's Office of History and Heritage Resources.
                                Major sources consulted include the following. Richard G. Hewlett and Oscar E. Anderson, Jr.,
                                The New World, 1939-1946: Volume I, A History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission
                                (Washington: U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, 1972), 71, 238-39; Chapter XI, "Security," in Vincent C. Jones,
                                Manhattan: The Army and the Atomic Bomb, United States Army in World War II (Washington: Center of Military History, United States Army, 1988),
                                253-79; Leslie M. Groves, Now It Can Be Told: The Story of the Manhattan Project (New York: Harper, 1962), 138-48;
                                Manhattan Project (War Department) press release, "Elaborate Security Measures Protected Secret of Atomic Bomb,"August 12, 1945, in
                                Manhattan District History, Book I - General, Volume 4 - Auxiliary Activities, Chapter 8 - Press Releases, Part I,
                                also available on the University Publications of America microfilm collection, "Manhattan Project: Official History and Documents" (Washington: 1977),
                                reel #1/12; Edith C. Truslow, with Kasha V. Thayer, ed., Manhattan Engineer District: Nonscientific Aspects of Los Alamos Project Y, 1942 through 1946 (Los Alamos, NM: Manhattan Engineer District,
                                    ca. 1946; first printed by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory as LA-5200, March 1973; reprinted in 1997 by the Los Alamos Historical Society),
                                93-94; Franklin Roosevelt to Robert Oppenheimer, June 29, 1943,
                                Library of Congress webpage. The quotation from the Los Alamos resident who recalled "I couldn't go to Santa Fe without being aware of hidden eyes…"
                                appeared in "Dateline: Los Alamos," a special issue of the monthly publication of Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) (1995), p. 20.
                                The images of posters are courtesy the Office of Government Reports, United States Information Service, Division of Public Inquiry,
                                Bureau of Special Services, Office of War Information (via National Archives and Records Administration).
                            



Home |
                                History Office |
                                OpenNet |
                                DOE  |
                                Privacy and Security Notices

About this Site |
                                How to Navigate this Site |
                                Note on Sources |
                                Site Map |
                                Contact Us







