


Manhattan Project: Places > Other Places




















Events


People


Places


Processes


Science


Resources




Places

"Met Lab"(MetallurgicalLaboratory)


Oak Ridge: Clinton Engineer Works


Hanford Engineer Works


Los Alamos


Other Places







Other Places

Places


Columbia University


University of California, Berkeley


The Dayton Project, 1943-1945


The Dayton Project, 1945 and Beyond


Bomb Casing and Drop Test Sites


Trinity Test Site


Tinian Island


City of Hiroshima


City of Nagasaki


Uranium Mines


Uranium Processing Facilities



                                            The work of the Manhattan Project was focused at four primary locations: the Met Lab, Oak Ridge, Hanford,
                                            and Los Alamos, Hanford. The endeavor nonetheless was truly national, even international, in scope, relying on scientists,
                                            engineers, and craft and industrial workers from all over the country, as well as Canada and the United Kingdom,
                                            and with specialized parts of the project done in diverse and dispersed locations.
                                        


                                            The earliest research work took place at academic institutions. Following the discovery of fission in late 1938, important theoretical
                                            work on fission chain reactions was done at Princeton University and Columbia University.
                                            Research on uranium enrichment was done at a number of universities. Scientists at the University of Virginia and Columbia University
                                            took the lead on centrifuge research. Columbia also was the center for gaseous diffusion research and development.
                                            The Radiation Laboratory at the University of California at Berkeley pioneered the
                                            electromagnetic method and was a center for nuclear research of all sorts. Experiments at Columbia University and the University
                                            of Minnesota quickly established that thermal diffusion was impractical for large-scale separation, but Philip Abelson proposed
                                            instead using liquid thermal diffusion and, with support from the Navy, began experimentation first at the Carnegie Institution,
                                            then at the Bureau of Standards, and finally at the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, D.C. Participation by scientists working
                                            at academic institutions diminished considerably with the focus of much of the research at the Met Lab at the University of Chicago
                                            and the relocation there by many scientists and then with the takeover of the project by the Army and the creation of the Los Alamos
                                            laboratory.
                                        

                                            With Army involvement and the launch of a full-scale effort in late 1942, scores of engineering and industrial firms with
                                            plants and factories at locations across the country and beyond were contracted with to provide goods and services.
                                            Uranium had to be procured, either from existing stocks or
                                            from uranium mines, and
                                            then milled and refined in a multi-step process. Most of the uranium
                                            used in the project came from Canada and the Congo, but not insignificant amounts came from the Colorado Plateau in the
                                            western United States. For milling and refining, the Army instituted three parallel production lines with three different
                                            contractors. Except for mills in Colorado close to the ore supply, most facilities in the U.S. were in the Midwest and Northeast.
                                        

                                            Many specialized activities took place at existing contractor facilities or at new facilities specifically constructed for the
                                            Manhattan Project. With a possible need for heavy water, for example, the Army contracted with the DuPont Company to construct
                                            heavy-water plants in connection with ordnance works that the company was building near Morgantown, West Virginia; Montgomery,
                                            Alabama; and Dana, Indiana. These would supplement supplies from an existing plant in Trail, British Columbia.
                                        

                                            Unplanned or unexpected requirements sometimes resulted in new processes and new facilities. Early in 1943, radiochemists at Los
                                            Alamos working on the initiator for the gun assembly found that polonium would be the best material to use.
                                            At the time, however, polonium existed only in theory, and it was unclear if sufficiently pure polonium could be manufactured.
                                            The Monsanto Chemical Company, in close cooperation with Los Alamos, was contracted to solve the twin problems of polonium
                                            production and purification. Properties rented by Monsanto in Dayton, Ohio, became the primary laboratories working on this task,
                                            and, as the Dayton Project, succeeded in developing manufacturing processes for polonium.
                                        

                                            The Army did much of the research, proving, testing, and training directly related to delivery and use of the bomb at various military
                                            installations. Initial bomb casing test drops were done at Dahlgren Naval Proving
                                            Ground on the Potomac River in Virginia. Later tests using full-scale dummy bombs and B-29 delivery aircraft were conducted at Muroc
                                            Army Air Base—now Edwards Air Force Base—in the California desert north of Los Angeles. Training of the bomb combat unit was conducted
                                            at Wendover Army Air Field, an isolated air base in western Utah. The Trinity test of the
                                            plutonium device was conducted at the Alamogordo Bombing Range in New Mexico. Final training runs and bomb assembly were done
                                            at Tinian Island in the western Pacific. The Tinian airfield was the base for the atomic bomb
                                            missions against Japan.
                                        

                                            The Manhattan Project—the research, development, production, and testing—culminated in the bombings of the cities
                                            of Hiroshima and Nagasaki,
                                            the only two uses of atomic bombs in combat to date.
                                        


Columbia University


University of California, Berkeley


The Dayton Project, 1943-1945


The Dayton Project, 1945 and Beyond


Bomb Casing and Drop Test Sites


Trinity Test Site


Tinian Island


City of Hiroshima


City of Nagasaki


Uranium Mines


Uranium Processing Facilities




Previous  
                                            







Sources and notes for this page


                                The text for this page is original to the Department of Energy's Office of History and Heritage Resources.
                                Major sources consulted include the following. Richard G. Hewlett and Oscar E. Anderson, Jr., The New World, 1939-1946: Volume I, A History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission (Washington: U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, 1972).
                                The map of Manhattan Project facilities in North America is reproduced from Vincent C. Jones, Manhattan: The Army and the Atomic Bomb, United States Army in World War II (Washington: Center of Military History, United States Army, 1988), 463.
                                The photograph of the tank Enrico Fermi used at ground zero soon after the test are courtesy of
                                the Los Alamos National Laboratory.
                            



Home |
                                History Office |
                                OpenNet |
                                DOE  |
                                Privacy and Security Notices

About this Site |
                                How to Navigate this Site |
                                Note on Sources |
                                Site Map |
                                Contact Us







