


Manhattan Project: The Cold War, 1945-1990




















Events


People


Places


Processes


Science


Resources




Time Periods

1890s-1939:
                  Atomic Discoveries


1939-1942:
                  Early 
                  Government Support


1942:
                  Difficult 
                  Choices


1942-1944:
                  The Uranium 
                  Path to
                  the Bomb


1942-1944:
                  The Plutonium 
                  Path to
                  the Bomb


1942-1945:
                  Bringing It All Together


1945:
                  Dawn of the 
                  Atomic Era


1945-present:
                  Postscript -- 
                  The Nuclear Age









THE COLD WAR (1945-1990)

Events
                            >
Postscript -- The Nuclear Age, 1945-Present




Informing the Public, August 1945


The Manhattan Engineer District, 1945-1946


First Steps toward International Control,
                            1944-1945


Search for a Policy on International Control,
                            1945


Negotiating International Control,
                            1945-1946


Civilian Control of Atomic Energy,
                            1945-1946


Operation Crossroads, July 1946


The VENONA Intercepts, 1946-1980


The Cold War, 1945-1990


Nuclear Proliferation, 1949-present



The
                      postwar organization of atomic energy
                      took place against the backdrop of growing tension with
                      the Soviet Union.  Relations between the United
                      States and the Soviet Union had been strained ever since
                      the revolution of 1917 had first brought communists to
                      power in Russia.  This mutual distrust further
                      deepened following the Soviet "non-aggression" treaty with
                      Nazi Germany in August 1939 and the Soviet Union's
                      subsequent invasions of Poland, Finland, and the Baltic
                      Republics.  Although Britain was allied with the
                      Soviet Union following Germany's June 1941 invasion of
                      Russia, as was the United States in the aftermath of Pearl
                      Harbor, mutual suspicion lingered throughout the Second
                      World War.  The failure of the United States and
                      Britain to tell the Soviet Union about the atomic bomb in
                      anything other than the most vague terms only heightened
                      the extreme suspicions of the Soviet dictator, Joseph
                      Stalin (right).  Not only did the atomic bombings of
                      Hiroshima
                      and
                      Nagasaki
                      help end the Second World War, but they also played a role
                      in setting the stage for the half-century of conflict with
                      the Soviet Union that followed it -- the Cold War.
                    

                      In March 1946, the former British Prime Minister, Winston
                      Churchill, warned that an "iron curtain" was descending
                      across Eastern Europe as the Soviet Union imposed
                      non-democratic communist governments on every nation under
                      its military control.  A year later,
                      President Harry S. Truman proclaimed the
                      "Truman Doctrine," asking for funds for overseas military
                      assistance to those governments that would oppose
                      communism.  On the issue of
                      international control of nuclear weapons, the United States, believing that the Soviet army posed
                      a threat to Western Europe and recognizing that American
                      non-nuclear forces had rapidly demobilized following the
                      war, refused to surrender its monopoly on nuclear weapons
                      without adequate controls.  In 1948 and 1949, the
                      United States continued implementing its policy of
                      "containment" of communism and the Soviet Union, most
                      notably with the "Marshall Plan" to help rebuild the
                      economies of Western Europe and with the North Atlantic
                      Treaty Organization (NATO) designed to oppose any Soviet
                      invasion of Europe.  In 1949, the Soviet Union tested
                      its first atomic bomb (closely resembling the
                      plutonium device tested
                      at Alamogordo, thanks to
                      espionage).  That same year, Chinese communists defeated
                      their nationalist opponents in the Chinese Civil
                      War.  By the time communist North Korea attacked
                      American-backed South Korea in June 1950, many in the
                      United States and around the world believed that a third
                      world war was imminent or had already begun.

In this atmosphere of national emergency, government
                      officials believed that continued American superiority in
                      nuclear weaponry was vital to preventing a third world
                      war.  If a global war should begin, American military
                      planners hoped that continued nuclear superiority would
                      allow the United States to strike the Soviet Union with
                      such force that damage to the United States would be
                      minimized and that Western Europe could eventually be
                      reclaimed from an invading Soviet army.  The
                      generation of United States Air Force generals who had
                      overseen the aerial destruction of the cities of Germany
                      and Japan was determined to prevent similar destruction of
                      American cities.  In 1950, following the beginning of
                      the Korean War and a secret governmental study called NSC
                      68, the United States nearly tripled its defense
                      budget.

The defense buildup of 1950-1951 included an expansion of
                      the nuclear weapons complex and an increase of the
                      stockpile of fission weapons.  Truman also approved
                      the design and production of the next generation of
                      nuclear weapons,
                      thermonuclear weapons (the "hydrogen bomb").  When the United States tested the first of these
                      on November 1, 1952 (right), the result was an explosion
                      that was equivalent to one produced by more than ten
                      million tons of TNT.  This was approximately
                      700 times the power of the uranium (fission) bomb
                      dropped on
                      Hiroshima Hospital.  In August 1953, the Soviet Union tested its first
                      "boosted fission weapon," which used thermonuclear burning
                      to enhance its yield, and in November 1955 the Soviet
                      Union tested its first true thermonuclear weapon. 
                      There was now almost no limit on the size of an explosion
                      either superpower could create.  In August 1957, the
                      Soviet Union tested the world's first intercontinental
                      ballistic missile (ICBM), a feat dramatized two months
                      later by the launch of the "Sputnik" satellite.  The
                      following year, the United States first began limited
                      operation of its own ICBM.  One of these
                      nuclear-tipped missiles from either side could arrive at
                      its target in less than an hour, and no defense was
                      possible once the missile was launched.  The only
                      thing thought now to be preserving the "delicate balance
                      of terror" was the promise that if one nation attacked,
                      the other would surely retaliate.  The era of "mutual
                      assured destruction," or "MAD," had dawned.

No global third world war ever took place.  Mindful
                      that a full-scale nuclear exchange would be a disaster for
                      both sides, the superpowers fought each other through a
                      variety of proxy wars and "shadow struggles" in Korea,
                      Vietnam, Afghanistan, and dozens of other places. 
                      The strategy of the United States and its like-minded
                      allies was to use the nuclear threat to avert a direct
                      Soviet attack on Western Europe and allow time for the
                      eventual internal reform or even collapse of the Soviet
                      Union and its satellite states.  Events eventually
                      confirmed this strategy, but the Soviet Union in the
                      interim proved willing to use overt military force to
                      prevent the collapse of communist governments, most
                      notably with its invasions of Hungary in 1956 and
                      Czechoslovakia in 1968.  At the same time, the Soviet
                      Union supported the spread of communism through
                      insurrections and the overthrow of pro-western regimes in
                      the third world.  The United States, in turn,
                      responded with economic and military aid and, where
                      necessary, armed force to prop up friendly governments and
                      used its own secret intelligence services in attempts to
                      overthrow unfriendly governments.
                    

After four decades of an enormously expensive arms race,
                      the Soviet economy in the 1980s finally collapsed. 
                      Once it became clear that the Soviet Union would no longer
                      intervene militarily, the people of Eastern Europe
                      overwhelmingly rejected communism in a wave of mostly
                      peaceful revolts throughout 1989 and 1990.  When the
                      Russian people were finally allowed to participate in a
                      democratic election, they too rejected communism, weary as
                      they were of more than seven decades of repressive and
                      sometimes murderous governments.  The peoples of
                      other nations that had been forced to join the Soviet
                      Union -- from the Baltic Republics to Ukraine to the
                      Caucasus Mountains to the steppes of Asia -- chose to
                      leave the Soviet Union completely.  On Christmas Day,
                      1991, the Soviet flag was lowered for the last time over
                      the Kremlin, and the Soviet Union officially ceased to
                      exist.

This "victory" did not come cheap.  Millions died in
                      the wars fought in Korea, Vietnam, Afghanistan, and
                      elsewhere.  Untold wealth, which could have been put
                      toward any number of social or humanitarian needs, was
                      expended on military manpower and sophisticated
                      weaponry.  Nor was victory foreordained.  No one
                      knew for certain whether communism would not prove to be
                      the inevitable wave of the future or if the ideological
                      struggle would not all end in a massive nuclear exchange
                      spawned by accident or desperation.

                      The nuclear weapons designed, built, and tested by the
                      Manhattan Project and its lineal descendents were perhaps
                      the single most defining element of the second half of the
                      twentieth century.
                      At the same time that they visited on the world
                      unprecedented fear and a daily awareness of the nearness
                      of global holocaust, nuclear weapons also bought the
                      necessary time to achieve a successful outcome to the Cold
                      War on the basis of ideology, economics, social structure,
                      and the limited application of military
                      might.  In the over half-century since the
                      Manhattan Project, the world has seen no wars that have
                      even come close to matching the death and destruction
                      associated with the two world wars of the early part of
                      the century.  Perhaps
                      Robert Oppenheimer's wish for a weapon
                      that was so terrible that war itself would become obsolete
                      was not entirely without hope.
                    


Informing the Public, August 1945


The Manhattan Engineer District, 1945-1946


First Steps toward International Control,
                            1944-1945


Search for a Policy on International Control,
                            1945


Negotiating International Control,
                            1945-1946


Civilian Control of Atomic Energy,
                            1945-1946


Operation Crossroads, July 1946


The VENONA Intercepts, 1946-1980


The Cold War, 1945-1990


Nuclear Proliferation, 1949-present



Previous    Next



Sources and notes for this page.


Most of the text for this page is original to the
                        Department of Energy's
                        Office of History and Heritage Resources.  Parts were adapted from, and portions were
                        taken directly from, the History Office publication:
                        Terrence R. Fehner and F. G. Gosling,
                          Origins of the Nevada Test Site (DOE/MA-0518;
                          Washington: History Division, Department of Energy,
                          December 2000), 86-87.  The phrase "the delicate balance of
                        terror" is from Albert Wohlstetter's famous article of
                        the same name, Foreign Affairs 37 (January
                        1959), 211-234.  The photographs of the Berlin Wall
                        in 1962 and of Dean Acheson signing the NATO Treaty are
                        courtesy the
                        North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).  The photograph of Joseph Stalin with Vyacheslav
                        Molotov is courtesy
                        Roosevelt Presidential Library
                        (via the
                        National Archives
                        (NARA)).  The photograph of the B-29s over Korea is
                        courtesy NARA.  The photograph of the Berlin Wall
                        in 1987 is courtesy the White House Photographic Office
                        (via NARA).  The photograph of the Marine in Korea
                        is courtesy the Office of the Secretary of the Air Force
                        (via NARA).  The photograph of the Soviet R-7 ICBM
                        is courtesy the
                        Federation of American Scientists.  The photograph of the Ivy Mike thermonuclear
                        (hydrogen bomb) test and the Ivy King
                        nuclear test are courtesy the Department of Energy's
                        Nevada Site Office.



Home |
                          History Office
                          
                          |
                          OpenNet
                          |
                          DOE
                          
                          |
                          Privacy and Security Notices
About this Site
                          |
                          
                            How to Navigate this Site
                          |
                          Note on Sources
                          |
                           Site Map |
                          Contact Us











