


Manhattan Project: Establishing Los Alamos, 1942-1943




















Events


People


Places


Processes


Science


Resources




Time Periods

1890s-1939:
                  Atomic Discoveries


1939-1942:
                  Early 
                  Government Support


1942:
                  Difficult 
                  Choices


1942-1944:
                  The Uranium 
                  Path to
                  the Bomb


1942-1944:
                  The Plutonium 
                  Path to
                  the Bomb


1942-1945:
                  Bringing It All Together


1945:
                  Dawn of the 
                  Atomic Era


1945-present:
                  Postscript -- 
                  The Nuclear Age









ESTABLISHING LOS ALAMOS (Los Alamos: Laboratory, 1942-1943)

Events
                            >
Bringing it All Together, 1942-1945




Establishing Los Alamos, 1942-1943


Early Bomb Design, 1943-1944


Basic Research at Los Alamos, 1943-1944


Implosion Becomes a Necessity, 1944


Oak Ridge and Hanford Come Through,
                            1944-1945


Final Bomb Design, 1944-1945


Atomic Rivals and the ALSOS Mission, 1938-1945


Espionage and the Manhattan Project,
                            1940-1945



The final link in the Manhattan Project's far-flung
                      network was the
                      bomb research and development laboratory
                      at Los Alamos, located in the mountains
                      of northern New Mexico.  Codenamed "Project Y," the
                      laboratory that designed and fabricated the first atomic
                      bombs began to take shape in spring 1942 when
                      James Conant suggested to
                      Vannevar Bush that the
                      Office of Scientific and Research Development
                      and the Army form a committee to study bomb
                      development.  Bush agreed and forwarded the
                      recommendation to Vice President Henry Wallace, Secretary
                      of War Henry Stimson, and General George Marshall (the Top
                      Policy Group).  By the time of his appointment in
                      late September, Leslie Groves had orders
                      to set up a committee to study military applications of
                      the bomb.  Meanwhile, sentiment was growing among the
                      Manhattan Project scientists that research on the bomb
                      project needed to be better coordinated. 
                      Robert Oppenheimer, among others,
                      advocated a central facility where theoretical and
                      experimental work could be conducted according to standard
                      scientific protocols.  This would insure accuracy and
                      speed progress.  Oppenheimer suggested that the bomb
                      design laboratory operate secretly in an isolated area but
                      allow free exchange of ideas among the scientists on the
                      staff.  Groves accepted Oppenheimer's suggestion and
                      began seeking an appropriate location.  By the end of
                      the year,
                      they had settled on an unlikely site for
                      the laboratory: an isolated boys' school on a mesa high in
                      the Jemez Mountains (map at left).

Groves selected Oppenheimer to head the new laboratory.
                      He proved to be an excellent director despite initial
                      concerns about his administrative inexperience, leftist
                      political sympathies, and lack of a Nobel Prize when
                      several scientists he would be directing were
                      prizewinners.  Oppenheimer insisted, with some
                      success, that scientists at Los Alamos remain as much an
                      academic community as possible, and he proved adept at
                      satisfying the emotional and intellectual needs of his
                      highly distinguished staff.  Although Oppenheimer and
                      Groves were of completely different temperaments, they
                      worked well together.  The Groves-Oppenheimer
                      alliance, though not one of intimacy, was marked by mutual
                      respect and was a major factor in the success of the
                      Manhattan Project.

Oppenheimer had a chance to
                      display his persuasive abilities early when he had to
                      convince scientists, many of them already deeply involved
                      in war-related research in university laboratories, to
                      join his new organization.  Complicating his task
                      were initial plans to operate Los Alamos as a military
                      laboratory.  Oppenheimer accepted Groves's rationale
                      for this arrangement but feared that the military chain of
                      command was ill-suited to scientific decision making and
                      soon found that scientists objected to working as
                      commissioned officers.  The issue came to a head when
                      Oppenheimer tried to convince Robert F. Bacher and Isidor
                      I. Rabi (far right in image at left) of the Massachusetts
                      Institute of Technology's Radiation Laboratory to join the
                      Los Alamos team.  Neither thought a military
                      environment was conducive to scientific research.  At
                      Oppenheimer's request, Conant and Groves wrote a letter
                      explaining that the secret weapon-related research had
                      presidential authority and was of the utmost national
                      importance.  The letter promised that the laboratory
                      would remain civilian through 1943, when it was believed
                      that heightened security needs would require
                      militarization of the final stages of the project (in
                      fact, militarization never took place).  Oppenheimer
                      would supervise all scientific work, and the military
                      would maintain the post and provide
                      security (below).
                    

Oppenheimer spent the first three months of 1943
                      tirelessly crisscrossing the country in an attempt to put
                      together a first-rate staff, an effort that proved highly
                      successful.  Even Bacher signed on, though he
                      promised to resign the moment militarization occurred;
                      Rabi, though he did not move to Los Alamos, became a
                      valuable consultant.  As soon as Oppenheimer arrived
                      at Los Alamos in mid-March, recruits began arriving from
                      universities across the United States, including
                      California, Minnesota,
                      Chicago, Princeton, Stanford, Purdue,
                      Columbia, Iowa State, and the
                      Massachusetts Institute of Technology, while still others
                      came from the Met Lab and the National
                      Bureau of Standards.  Virtually overnight Los Alamos
                      became an ivory tower frontier boomtown, as scientists and
                      their families, along with
                      particle accelerators and other
                      experimental equipment, including two Van de Graaff
                      generators, a Cockroft-Walton machine,
                      and a cyclotron, arrived caravan fashion
                      at the Santa Fe railroad station and then made their way
                      up to the mesa along the single primitive road.  The
                      staff included many contemporary and future stars of the
                      scientific community, including Luis Alvarez,
                      Hans Bethe, Norris Bradbury,
                      Enrico Fermi,
                      Richard Feynman, Eric Jette, George
                      Kistiakowsky, Seth Neddermeyer, John von Neumann, Emilio
                      Segrè, Cyril Smith, Edward Teller,
                      Victor Weisskopf, Robert Wilson, and many more.  In
                      the spring of 1943, a sizeable contingent of British
                      scientists arrived at Los Alamos as well.  It was a
                      most remarkable collection of talent and machinery that
                      settled this remote outpost of the Manhattan Project.
                    


Establishing Los Alamos, 1942-1943


Early Bomb Design, 1943-1944


Basic Research at Los Alamos, 1943-1944


Implosion Becomes a Necessity, 1944


Oak Ridge and Hanford Come Through,
                            1944-1945


Final Bomb Design, 1944-1945


Atomic Rivals and the ALSOS Mission, 1938-1945


Espionage and the Manhattan Project,
                            1940-1945



  Next



Sources and notes for this page.


The text for this page was adapted from, and portions
                        were taken directly from the Office of History and Heritage Resources
                        publication:
                        F. G. Gosling,
                          The Manhattan Project: Making the Atomic Bomb
                          (DOE/MA-0001; Washington: History Division, Department
                          of Energy, January 1999), 35, 37-38.  See also
                        In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer: Transcript of
                          Hearing Before Personnel Security Board, Washington,
                          D.C., April 12, 1954, Through May 6, 1954
                        (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1954),
                        12-13.  The list of staff at
                        Los Alamos is adapted in part from
                        "Dateline: Los Alamos," a special issue of the monthly
                        publication of
                        Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL)
                        (1995), 8.  The photograph of the "Tech Area" at Los Alamos is courtesy LANL.  The map of Los
                        Alamos is reprinted from Vincent C. Jones,
                        Manhattan: The Army and the Atomic Bomb, United
                        States Army in World War II (Washington: Center of
                        Military History, United States Army, 1988), 330. 
                        The photograph of the students playing hockey on Ashley
                        Pond is reprinted from "Dateline: Los Alamos," a special
                        issue of the monthly publication of LANL (1995),
                        7.  The photograph of
                        Ernest Lawrence,
                        Enrico Fermi, and Isidore Rabi is
                        courtesy LANL.  The photograph of the MP checking
                        the resident's ID is reprinted in the photo insert of F.
                        G. Gosling,
                        The Manhattan Project: Making the Atomic Bomb
                        (Washington: History Division, DOE, October 2001).



Home |
                          History Office
                          
                          |
                          OpenNet
                          |
                          DOE
                          
                          |
                          Privacy and Security Notices
About this Site
                          |
                          
                            How to Navigate this Site
                          |
                          Note on Sources
                          |
                           Site Map |
                          Contact Us











