 









Marie Curie – Biographical - NobelPrize.org
















 



















 




Skip to content 















Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed



Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed





Close Mobile Menu






Toggle Mobile Menu 





Nobel Prizes & laureates

All Nobel Prizes
Nobel Prizes 2023
Physics prize
Chemistry prize
Medicine prize
Literature prize
Peace prize
Prize in economic sciences


About

About the prize
Alfred Nobel
Award ceremonies
Nomination
Organisation


Stories
Educational
Events & museums



Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed



Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed











Header Search 



Submit a search term
Allows users to submit a search term










		Enhanced Page Navigation	



					Marie Curie - Biographical				










The Nobel Prize in Physics 1903 





Summary

Laureates

Henri Becquerel



Pierre Curie

Marie Curie

Facts



Biographical



Nobel Lecture



Nominations



Documentary



Photo gallery



Questions and Answers



Other resources



The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1911



Presentation Speech





Share this 





Facebook 






X 






LinkedIn 






Email this page 









Marie Curie 

Biographical 


Navigate to:
 Summary- Henri Becquerel- Pierre Curie-- Facts-- Biographical-- Nobel Lecture-- Nominations-- Documentary-- Photo gallery-- Questions and Answers-- Other resources-- The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1911 Presentation Speech

Marie Curie, née Maria Sklodowska, was born in Warsaw on November 7, 1867, the daughter of a secondary-school teacher. She received a general education in local schools and some scientific training from her father. She became involved in a students’ revolutionary organization and found it prudent to leave Warsaw, then in the part of Poland dominated by Russia, for Cracow, which at that time was under Austrian rule. In 1891, she went to Paris to continue her studies at the Sorbonne where she obtained Licenciateships in Physics and the Mathematical Sciences. She met Pierre Curie, Professor in the School of Physics in 1894 and in the following year they were married. She succeeded her husband as Head of the Physics Laboratory at the Sorbonne, gained her Doctor of Science degree in 1903, and following the tragic death of Pierre Curie in 1906, she took his place as Professor of General Physics in the Faculty of Sciences, the first time a woman had held this position. She was also appointed Director of the Curie Laboratory in the Radium Institute of the University of Paris, founded in 1914.
Her early researches, together with her husband, were often performed under difficult conditions, laboratory arrangements were poor and both had to undertake much teaching to earn a livelihood. The discovery of radioactivity by Henri Becquerel in 1896 inspired the Curies in their brilliant researches and analyses which led to the isolation of polonium, named after the country of Marie’s birth, and radium. Mme. Curie developed methods for the separation of radium from radioactive residues in sufficient quantities to allow for its characterization and the careful study of its properties, therapeutic properties in particular.
Mme. Curie throughout her life actively promoted the use of radium to alleviate suffering and during World War I, assisted by her daughter, Irene, she personally devoted herself to this remedial work. She retained her enthusiasm for science throughout her life and did much to establish a radioactivity laboratory in her native city – in 1929 President Hoover of the United States presented her with a gift of $ 50,000, donated by American friends of science, to purchase radium for use in the laboratory in Warsaw.
Mme. Curie, quiet, dignified and unassuming, was held in high esteem and admiration by scientists throughout the world. She was a member of the Conseil du Physique Solvay from 1911 until her death and since 1922 she had been a member of the Committee of Intellectual Co-operation of the League of Nations. Her work is recorded in numerous papers in scientific journals and she is the author of Recherches sur les Substances Radioactives (1904), L’Isotopie et les Éléments Isotopes and the classic Traité’ de Radioactivité (1910).
The importance of Mme. Curie’s work is reflected in the numerous awards bestowed on her. She received many honorary science, medicine and law degrees and honorary memberships of learned societies throughout the world. Together with her husband, she was awarded half of the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1903, for their study into the spontaneous radiation discovered by Becquerel, who was awarded the other half of the Prize. In 1911 she received a second Nobel Prize, this time in Chemistry, in recognition of her work in radioactivity. She also received, jointly with her husband, the Davy Medal of the Royal Society in 1903 and, in 1921, President Harding of the United States, on behalf of the women of America, presented her with one gram of radium in recognition of her service to science.
For further details, cf. Biography of Pierre Curie. Mme. Curie died in Savoy, France, after a short illness, on July 4, 1934.


From Nobel Lectures, Physics 1901-1921, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1967



This autobiography/biography was written
at the time of the award and first
published in the book series Les Prix Nobel.
It was later edited and republished in Nobel Lectures. To cite this document, always state the source as shown above.


The Nobel Foundation's copyright has expired. 



To cite this section 
MLA style: Marie Curie – Biographical. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2024. Wed. 12 Jun 2024. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1903/marie-curie/biographical/> 



Back to top 

Back To Top
Takes users back to the top of the page

















Nobel Prizes and laureates







Nobel Prizes 2023 




Eleven laureates were awarded a Nobel Prize in 2023, for achievements that have conferred the greatest benefit to humankind. Their work and discoveries range from effective mRNA vaccines and attosecond physics to fighting against the oppression of women.See them all presented here. 


 





Explore prizes and laureates 

Look for popular awards and laureates in different fields, and discover the history of the Nobel Prize. 




Select the category or categories you would like to filter by 


Physics 

Chemistry 

Medicine 

Literature 

Peace 

Economic Sciences 



Select the category or categories you would like to filter by




Physics 






Chemistry 






Medicine 






Literature 






Peace 






Economic Sciences 





Decrease the year by one 

- 

Choose a year you would like to search in 


Increase the year by one 

+ 



Explore 















About the Nobel Prize organisation 



The Nobel Foundation 
Tasked with a mission to manage Alfred Nobel's fortune and has ultimate responsibility for fulfilling the intentions of Nobel's will.



The prize-awarding institutions 
For more than a century, these academic institutions have worked independently to select Nobel Prize laureates.



Outreach organisations 
Several outreach organisations and activities have been developed to inspire generations and disseminate knowledge about the Nobel Prize.





Press
Contact
FAQ



Privacy policy
Technical support
Terms of use



For developers
Media player




Join us 
 
Facebook

 
Twitter

 
Instagram

 
Youtube

 
LinkedIn








The Nobel Prize 



Copyright © Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2024 

















