



math history - How (or why) did Topology become so central to modern mathematics? - Mathematics Stack Exchange







































 


Skip to main content










Stack Exchange Network

						Stack Exchange network consists of 183 Q&A communities including Stack Overflow, the largest, most trusted online community for developers to learn, share their knowledge, and build their careers.
					
Visit Stack Exchange












Loading…



















                                Tour
                                
                                    Start here for a quick overview of the site
                                




                            Help Center
                            
                                Detailed answers to any questions you might have
                            




                                        Meta
                                        
                                            Discuss the workings and policies of this site
                                        




                                    About Us
                                    
                                        Learn more about Stack Overflow the company, and our products
                                    














current community
















            Mathematics
        



help
chat









            Mathematics Meta
        






your communities            



Sign up or log in to customize your list.                


more stack exchange communities

company blog








Log in

Sign up






















 Home






 Questions






 Tags







 Users






 Unanswered






Teams



            Ask questions, find answers and collaborate at work with Stack Overflow for Teams.
        
Explore Teams
Create a free Team




Teams







            Ask questions, find answers and collaborate at work with Stack Overflow for Teams.
            Explore Teams








Teams
Q&A for work
Connect and share knowledge within a single location that is structured and easy to search.

                    Learn more about Teams
                











How (or why) did Topology become so central to modern mathematics?



        Ask Question
    





Asked
8 years ago


Modified
8 years ago


Viewed
                        701 times
                    

















            3
        












$\begingroup$

It is frequently said that topology is nowadays one of the central pillars of modern mathematics (ex. "Because of its central place in a broad spectrum of mathematics")  The field has managed to blossom into a magnificently large field of mathematics, with tons of major applications into fields that even exist outside of math. How and why did this happen? Did topology originally come about as a way to solve unsolved problems at its time of origin, and later grew into what it is today? How has it become so central? (Side note: On a not too uncommon basis, topology seems to be one of the more 'quirky' fields of math.)




math-history









Share


Cite



                        Follow
                        










            asked Jun 9, 2016 at 17:28






ColbiColbi

81577 silver badges1818 bronze badges






$\endgroup$

2










$\begingroup$
The way these fields usually develop is that a bunch of seemingly unrelated problems are solved.  Then, somebody says "hey, a lot of these problems follow a similar framework, maybe we can come up with a language which lets us talk about all of these things".  Someone then comes up with a mathematical structure that accomplishes this (in this case, a "topological space"), and then the study of that structure becomes an area of study.
$\endgroup$

– Ben Grossmann

Jun 9, 2016 at 17:35










$\begingroup$
A lot of the "questions" that were originally answered by topology were really a matter of justifying statements that were pretty much taken as true, but hadn't been rigorously proven.  For example, the convergence of a Fourier series to the associated function and the Jordan curve theorem.
$\endgroup$

– Ben Grossmann

Jun 9, 2016 at 17:38






Add a comment
 | 











                                        3 Answers
                                    3






            Sorted by:
        

            Reset to default
        




                        Highest score (default)
                    

                        Date modified (newest first)
                    

                        Date created (oldest first)
                    
















            1
        

















$\begingroup$

First of all, even as a topologist, I wouldn't say that topology is any more central than a variety of other fields: analysis, algebra, and so on. Even then, there are areas of topology that really don't have any broad applications outside the subject itself: surgery theory, some of the very technical computations of the stable homotopy groups of spheres, etc. Topology at least appears in a variety of subjects, though, because it seems to be the suitable framework for a lot of math. In introductory real analysis, the intermediate value theorem is a statement about connectedness. The objects in differential geometry, analysis on manifolds, etc. are topological spaces (with a lot of extra structure). Even some constructions that aren't inherently topological, like (in)direct limits, naturality, often pop up first for students via algebraic topology classes. 
Here's a more specific example. One of the most familiar examples of a cohomology theory is de Rham cohomology on a smooth manifold. This is a very concrete object: It's the space of solutions to a certain differential equation, modulo a space of 'trivial' solutions. Those equations always have a local solution; the problem is that those local solutions don't necessarily patch together to give a global solution. Cohomology groups are the obstructions to this patching construction. The same idea of obstructions to solving a global problem locally pops up in several different areas of math. Sheaf cohomology on a scheme, for example, is quite concretely a similar sort of obstruction, even though the Zariski topology is very different from the topology of a smooth manifold (or even CW-complex). There's another kind of cohomology defined for groups acting on modules, the connection being that abstract nonsense gives a connection between the group cohomology of $\pi$ and the (say, singular) cohomology of $K(\pi, 1)$. (I'm skipping over some nontrivial details here.) The same idea pops up in complex analysis (the Cousin problems, for example), various parts of physics, etc.; furthermore, extensions of this idea pop up in algebraic geometry, $K$-theory, and so on.








Share


Cite



                        Follow
                        










            answered Jun 9, 2016 at 17:57






anomalyanomaly

25.5k55 gold badges4646 silver badges8787 bronze badges






$\endgroup$








Add a comment
 | 



















            1
        

















$\begingroup$

One reason is that limits and/or convergence are very important, because they allow you to approximate complicated objects by simple objects. For example, maybe you want to approximate a function by polynomials (taylor series) or by sinusoids (fourier analysis). From this standpoint, the important observation is that every topology induces a convergence structure, and topologies were invented first. Keywords: functional analysis, topological vector space.
A second reason is that (classical) differential geometry is based on the concept of a manifold, which is usually formulated in a way that makes reference to topological spaces. Indeed, at the bottom rung of the manifold ladder are "topological manifolds", which can be defined as topological spaces that look locally like $\mathbb{R}^n$, subject to the some further constraints.
A third reason is that the basic definitions of homotopy theory make sense over general topological spaces; you don't need a manifold.
A fourth reason is the Zariski topology just so happens to be a topology.
A fifth reason is that often when you combine infinitely-many set-theoretic objects together in an interesting way, the resulting structure often ends up carrying a topology in a natural way. Look up "profinite completion of the integers." Its fundamental to modern number theory.
A sixth reason is that we can consider the sheaves on a topological space, and $\mathbf{Set}$-valued sheaves are about as fundamental of an object as there is, because they always form a topos, which is a place where higher-order intuitionistic logic can be interpreted.








Share


Cite



                        Follow
                        










edited Jun 9, 2016 at 17:54














            answered Jun 9, 2016 at 17:49






goblin GONEgoblin GONE

68k1919 gold badges106106 silver badges288288 bronze badges






$\endgroup$








Add a comment
 | 















            0
        

















$\begingroup$

In a very simplistic way we can think of it like this. Analysis means limit. Limit means continuity. Continuity means open set. And open sets mean topology. So in a way topology is the basis of analysis. Or at least that's how I see it.








Share


Cite



                        Follow
                        










            answered Jun 9, 2016 at 18:00






AmontilladoAmontillado

1,18988 silver badges1616 bronze badges






$\endgroup$








Add a comment
 | 






                                    You must log in to answer this question.
                                


Not the answer you're looking for? Browse other questions tagged math-history.                                









Related



34

How did the notation "ln" for "log base e" become so pervasive?



28

Origins of the modern definition of topology



8

Disjunction: Why did the inclusive "OR" become the convention?



6

Where can I find a good comprehensive read about the history of Mathematics?



5

How did self-similarity come into mathematics?



47

What did mathematicians study as an undergraduate/graduate before modern mathematics such as modern algebra and analysis?



8

How did the axiom of choice become the boogeyman?







            Hot Network Questions
        




                    Python script to auto change profiles in MSI Afterburner
                



                    Thought experiment regarding gravity
                



                    Difference between conflicted and ambivalent?
                



                    Commutativity of the wreath product
                



                    Geometry Nodes - Fill Quadrilaterals That Intersect
                



                    Word for a country declaring independence from an empire
                



                    What does "far right tilt" actually mean in the context of the EU in 2024?
                



                    How much of an advantage is it to have high acceleration in space combat
                



                    How big can a chicken get?
                



                    In the Unabomber case, was "call Nathan R" really mistakenly written by a New York Times intern?
                



                    Can someone explain the damage distrubution on this aircraft that flew through a hailstorm?
                



                    Why is array access not an infix operator?
                



                    Yosemite national park availability
                



                    Having friends who are talented is great, but it can also be ___ at times
                



                    How to explain Hazard Ratio in layman‘s terms
                



                    Should I ask for authorship or ignore?
                



                    solana/web3.js Request Airdrop 429 error
                



                    What is the point of triggering of a national snap election immediately after losing the EU elections?
                



                    Executable files with a bytecode compiler/interpreter
                



                    Create repeating geometry across a face
                



                    Ubuntu Terminal with alternating colours for each line
                



                    How do Authenticators work?
                



                    What happens when you target a dead creature with Scrying?
                



                    How do you load a regtest wallet?
                



            more hot questions
        




            Question feed
        




                Subscribe to RSS
            



                        Question feed
                        To subscribe to this RSS feed, copy and paste this URL into your RSS reader.
























Mathematics

Tour
Help
Chat
Contact
Feedback



Company

Stack Overflow
Teams
Advertising
Collectives
Talent
About
Press
Legal
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Cookie Settings
Cookie Policy




Stack Exchange Network



                                    Technology
                                



                                    Culture & recreation
                                



                                    Life & arts
                                



                                    Science
                                



                                    Professional
                                



                                    Business
                                



                                    API
                                



                                    Data
                                







Blog
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Instagram


Site design / logo © 2024 Stack Exchange Inc; user contributions licensed under CC BY-SA.                    rev 2024.6.11.10735












