



Mathematical Models in Science | Definition & Examples | Study.com













































for Teachers
for Schools
for Working Scholars®
for College Credit


























Log In


Sign Up

Menu
					










									Plans
							



									Subjects
							





Art


Business


Computer Science


Education & Teaching


English


Health & Medicine


History


Humanities


Math


Psychology


Science


Social Science







							 
						



									Art
							



									Architecture 




									Art History 




									Design 




									Performing Arts 




									Visual Arts 






							 
						



									Business
							



									Accounting 




									Business Administration 




									Business Communication 




									Business Ethics 




									Business Intelligence 




									Business Law 




									Economics 




									Finance 




									Healthcare Administration 




									Human Resources 




									Information Technology 




									International Business 




									Operations Management 




									Real Estate 




									Sales & Marketing 






							 
						



									Computer Science
							



									Computer Engineering 




									Computer Programming 




									Cybersecurity 




									Data Science 




									Software 






							 
						



									Education & Teaching
							



									Education Law & Policy 




									Pedagogy & Teaching Strategies 




									Special & Specialized Education 




									Student Support in Education 




									Teaching English Language Learners 






							 
						



									English
							



									Grammar 




									Literature 




									Public Speaking 




									Reading 




									Vocabulary 




									Writing & Composition 






							 
						



									Health & Medicine
							



									Counseling & Therapy 




									Health 




									Medicine 




									Nursing 




									Nutrition 






							 
						



									History
							



									US History 




									World History 






							 
						



									Humanities
							



									Communication 




									Ethics 




									Foreign Languages 




									Philosophy 




									Religious Studies 






							 
						



									Math
							



									Algebra 




									Basic Math 




									Calculus 




									Geometry 




									Statistics 




									Trigonometry 






							 
						



									Psychology
							



									Clinical & Abnormal Psychology 




									Cognitive Science 




									Developmental Psychology 




									Educational Psychology 




									Organizational Psychology 




									Social Psychology 






							 
						



									Science
							



									Anatomy & Physiology 




									Astronomy 




									Biology 




									Chemistry 




									Earth Science 




									Engineering 




									Environmental Science 




									Physics 






							 
						



									Social Science
							



									Anthropology 




									Criminal Justice 




									Geography 




									Law 




									Linguistics 




									Political Science 




									Sociology 







									Courses
							





By Subject


By Education Level


Adult Education


Transferable Credit







							By Subject
						



									Arts 




									Business 




									Computer Science 




									Education & Teaching 




									English (ELA) 




									Foreign Language 




									Health & Medicine 




									History 




									Humanities 




									Math 




									Psychology 




									Science 




									Social Science 






							By Education Level
						



									Elementary School 




									Middle School 




									High School 




									College 




									Graduate and Post-Grad 







									Test Prep
							





Teacher Certification Exams


Nursing Exams


Allied Health & Medicine Exams


Real Estate Exams


All Test Prep







							 
						



									Teacher Certification Exams
							



									Praxis 




									FTCE 




									TExES 




									CSET & CBEST 




									More Teacher Certification Test Prep 






							 
						



									Nursing Exams
							



									NCLEX 




									HESI 




									More Nursing Test Prep 






							 
						



									Allied Health & Medicine Exams
							



									ASCP 




									CNA 




									CNS 




									More Medical Test Prep 






							 
						



									Real Estate Exams
							



									Real Estate Sales 




									Real Estate Brokers 




									Real Estate Appraisals 







									Teach
							





Teaching Resources and Curriculum


Skills Practice


Lesson Plans


Teacher Certification


Teacher Professional Development








									Tutoring
							





Math Tutoring


Science Tutoring


Business Tutoring


Humanities Tutoring







							 
						



									Math Tutoring
							



									Algebra  Tutoring




									Calculus  Tutoring




									Geometry  Tutoring




									Pre-calculus  Tutoring




									Statistics  Tutoring




									Trigonometry  Tutoring






							 
						



									Science Tutoring
							



									Biology  Tutoring




									Chemistry  Tutoring




									Physics  Tutoring






							 
						



									Business Tutoring
							



									Accounting  Tutoring




									Economics  Tutoring




									Finance  Tutoring






							 
						



									Humanities Tutoring
							



									History  Tutoring




									Literature  Tutoring




									Writing  Tutoring






Sign Up


































 Test Prep Courses
			
			/
			
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	

	
	
	
		
		
		
		
		
			
TExES Mathematics 7-12 (235) Prep
Course




		Mathematical Models in Science | Definition & Examples
	






Lesson



						
							
								Additional Info
							
							
						
					




					Emily Matthews, Catherine Glover
			


Author

Emily Matthews
Emily Matthews has 7 years’ experience developing and supporting educational materials for a biological supply company. She has a B.S. in Applied Biology from the Georgia Institute of Technology. She has also been a tutor and a teaching assistant for genetics and math courses. 

					View bio
				


Instructor

Catherine Glover
Catherine has a master's degree in Mathematical Biology and teaches math at the college level.

					View bio
				



							Explore mathematical models in science, such as exponential growth, exponential decay, and linear and quadratic models. See examples of mathematical modeling.
						
								
									Updated: 11/21/2023
								






Table of ContentsMathematical Models in Science What is a Mathematical Model? Mathematical Model Examples Lesson SummaryShow 



Frequently Asked Questions



Why are mathematical models important in science?

Mathematical models can be used to predict the outcome of a process under new conditions. Also, if a model gives inaccurate predictions, it can show that the process is not as well understood as scientists thought and indicate a need for further research. Finally, when seemingly unrelated processes follow similar models, it can suggest that there are deeper universal laws underlying those processes.



How are mathematical models used in science?

Mathematical models in science are developed based on both empirical testing and theory. They simplify and describe complex processes using mathematical equations. They are also used to predict the outcome of the process under different conditions.



What are four types of mathematical models?

Four common types of mathematical models are exponential decay, exponential growth, quadratic models, and linear models. Exponential decay and exponential growth models describe quantities that decrease or increase following an exponential curve. Quantities in quadratic models change along a parabola, and quantities in linear models change in a straight line.












		Create an account
		




Table of ContentsMathematical Models in Science What is a Mathematical Model? Mathematical Model Examples Lesson SummaryShow 






Mathematical Models in Science



Mathematical models use mathematical equations to describe, predict, and simplify real-world systems. They are used in all fields of physical science, including biology, physics, and chemistry. Mathematical models are also used in engineering and some social sciences. If a system's inputs and outputs can be described with numbers, a mathematical model can be developed for it.
Mathematical models are often used to make predictions and answer questions. For example, a business might want to know how their profits will change if they change the cost of a product. They could use data from past products to develop a model that predicts how pricing influences sales. Similarly, mathematical models in science make predictions based on equations developed from past experiments.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account













									Lesson
							



									Quiz
								



									Course
								



						














	
	
							9.8K
							views







What is a Mathematical Model?



A mathematical model consists of one or more mathematical equations. The equations contain variables, which are values to input into the equation, and parameters, which are constants whose value depends on the particular model and situation.
In the physical sciences, mathematical models are often developed from a combination of empirical observation and theory. After a model has been developed, its predictions can be tested experimentally to show whether the model is valid. If the predictions are incorrect, it may mean that scientists need to investigate the system further. Mathematical modeling can also highlight common behaviors in seemingly unrelated systems. For example, models in very different fields of science may use the same types of equations, as described in the examples below.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account















Mathematical Model Examples



Mathematical models are used throughout the physical sciences. Some models in different fields include the following.
Biology: population growth, disease spread, and competition between species
Chemistry: chemical reaction rates
Physics: Radioactive decay, wave behavior, and the motion of falling objects
Many mathematical models use similar equations. Four common forms of mathematical models are exponential decay, exponential growth, quadratic functions, and linear functions.Exponential DecayExponential decay occurs when a quantity decreases over time at a rate that changes with the quantity's current value. In other words, it decreases rapidly at the beginning and then more and more slowly over time.

Examples of exponential decay functions






The general equation for exponential decay is:N(t) = N0 e-rtWhere:
N0 is the initial number.
e is the mathematical constant and e = 2.718... . Some models may use different values instead of e.
r is the rate constant, which depends on the particular model.
t is time.
Example: Radioactive DecayRadioactive decay is an example of a mathematical model that uses the exponential decay equation. In a sample of radioactive material, the number of atoms of an unstable isotope decreases exponentially over time as the atoms decay into more stable forms.

A graph of radioactive decay. At the half life, shown as t(1/2), the number of nuclei remaining is half of the original number.






Sample Question:Scientists have a 10 g sample of cobalt-60. Its rate constant is r=0.1308. How much cobalt-60 will remain after 2 years?In the exponential decay equation:
N0 = 10 g
r = 0.1308
t = 2
Therefore:
N(2) = 10e-0.1308*2
N(2) = 10e-0.2616
N(2) = 7.70 g
7.7 grams of cobalt-60 remain.Example: Attenuation of WavesThe attenuation of waves is another mathematical model in science that shows exponential decay. Waves traveling through a medium will attenuate, or weaken, as some of their energy is absorbed or scattered by the medium itself. The attenuation of waves through a medium can be modeled as:{eq}A(z) = A_0\textit{e}^{-\alpha*z} {/eq}Where:
A0 is the initial amplitude and A(z) is the final amplitude of the wave.
alpha is the attenuation coefficient of the wave, which depends on the medium and the wave's frequency and wavelength.
z is the distance traveled.
This model applies to all types of waves, including electromagnetic radiation and sound waves. The attenuation coefficient is traditionally expressed in Nepers per meter, but it can also be converted to decibels per meter.Sample Question:Someone shouts at 90 decibels inside a room with solid walls. The walls' attenuation coefficient is 3 decibels per meter, and the walls are 0.5 meters thick. Will the shout be audible directly outside of the walls?In the formula for wave attenuation:
A0 = 90
alpha = 3
z = 0.5
Therefore:
A(0.5) = 90e-3(0.5)
A(0.5) = 90e-1.5
A(0.5) = 20.1 decibels
20 decibels is about the volume of a whisper, so the shout will be just audible.Exponential GrowthExponential growth is similar to exponential decay, but the quantity increases rather than decreases. Quantities that follow exponential growth will increase slowly at the beginning and then faster and faster as they get larger.

Examples of population growth functions






The general equation for exponential growth is:N(t) = N0xrtWhere:
N0 is the initial quantity.
x is a parameter that depends on the particular model.
r is the rate constant.
t is time.
The exponential growth equation is similar to the exponential decay equation, but the exponent is positive instead of negative.Example: Investment with Compound InterestMathematical modeling can predict the growth of investments with compound interest. When the interest is compounded a fixed number of times per year, the investment's value is:{eq}B(t) = B_0(1+\frac{r}{n})^{nt} {/eq}Where:
B0 is the initial balance.
r is the interest rate, written as a decimal.
n is the number of times the interest is compounded per year.
t is time in years.


The growth of a $10,000 investment with 15% interest compounding annually







Although the formula is different from the general equation for exponential growth, this is still an exponential growth model. In fact, if interest is compounded continuously, the model of the investment takes a more familiar form: B(t) = B0ertExample: Population Growth of BacteriaA researcher sets up a culture of E. coli with an initial sample of 100 bacteria. They know that the rate constant for E. coli's growth under their conditions is 0.5. How many bacteria will they have after 12 hours?The population growth of bacteria follows the general equation for exponential growth. For the example problem:
N0 = 100.
x is 2 because each bacterial cell reproduces by splitting into two cells.
r = 0.5 as given in the problem.
t = 12 hours.
Therefore:
N(12) = 100*20.5*12
N(12) = 100*26
N(12) = 100*64
N(12) = 6,400
The researcher will have 6,400 cells after 12 hours.Free Fall and Projectile MotionFree fall and projectile motion are examples of mathematical models that use quadratic functions. Quadratic functions follow a U-shaped parabola, either upright or inverted. The general form of a quadratic function is y = ax2 + bx + c.

Examples of quadratic functions








More examples of quadratic functions






Free fall occurs when an object is either dropped or thrown directly up or down. Although the object may have an initial velocity, its acceleration is only affected by gravity. The basic model for free fall disregards air resistance.Free fall uses the model:{eq}y = y_0 + v_0*t - \frac{1}{2}g*t^2 {/eq}Where:
y0 is the object's initial position (its height).
v0 is the object's initial velocity.
g is the acceleration due to gravity, which is always 9.8 m/s2.
t is time.
The full graph of the free fall model is a parabola that shows the object going up and then going back down. If an object is thrown directly upward, the full parabola would be an accurate model. If an object is dropped or thrown directly downward, only the downward half of the parabola applies to the real-world situation.

When an object is dropped, the free fall function begins at the maximum of the parabola at time 0.






Projectile motion occurs when an object is thrown or fired in a direction that is not completely in line with gravity's force. Mathematical modeling of projectile motion separates the vertical and horizontal components:
Because gravity does not affect horizontal movement, the horizontal component of projectile motion uses a linear equation: x = x0 + v0 
   

The vertical component of projectile motion is the same as free fall and uses the same quadratic model.
Example: Free FallA ball is dropped from the top of a building and hits the ground 3 seconds later. How high is the building?In the free fall equation above:
y is 0 when the ball hits the ground.
v0 is 0, because the ball is dropped rather than thrown.
g = 9.8 m/s2
t = 3
Therefore:
0 = y0 + (0 x 3) - (1/2 x 9.8 x 32)
0 = y0 - 44.1
y0 = 44.1
The building is 44.1 meters tall.Hooke's LawLinear functions produce a straight line. In mathematical modeling, linear functions have a quantity that changes at a constant rate. The general form of a linear function is y=mx+b.Hooke's law is an example of a linear mathematical model in science. It is used to describe elastic materials, which have a restoring force that tries to return them to equilibrium after they are stretched or compressed. Hooke's law shows that the strength of the restoring force is proportional to the distance that the material is displaced.

Springs stretch to a length proportional to the weight upon them.






Hooke's law can be written as:F = -kxWhere:
F is the restoring force of a spring.
k is the spring constant, expressed in Newtons/meter.
x is the amount of displacement of the end of the spring.
The expression is negative because the restoring force and the displacement are in opposite directions.Example: Stretching a SpringA spring is 10 cm long. It takes 2 N of force to stretch it to 15 cm. How much force does it take to stretch it to 20 cm?The spring constant can be found with Hooke's law:
F = 2 N
x is the displacement from 10 cm to 15 cm, so x = 5 cm or 0.05 m
2 = -k(0.05)
-k = 2/0.05
k = -40
To stretch the spring to 20 cm:
k = -40
x is the displacement from 10 cm to 20 cm, so x = 10 cm or 0.1 m
F = -(-40)0.1
F = 40 x 0.1 = 4
It takes 4 N of force to stretch the string to 20 cm.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Lesson Summary



Mathematical models use math to describe real-world phenomena. They are used in all branches of physical science, including biology, chemistry, and physics. Many mathematical models are based on four common functions: exponential decay, exponential growth, and quadratic and linear functions.

Exponential decay occurs when a quantity decreases rapidly at first, then decreases more slowly as its number gets smaller. Nuclear decay and wave attenuation are examples of exponential decay models.
Exponential growth occurs when a quantity increases slowly at first, then increases faster and faster as its number gets larger. Example models include investment with compound interest and population growth.
Quadratic functions occur when a quantity follows a U-shaped parabola, either upright or inverted. Free fall and projectile motion are examples of models that use quadratic functions.
Linear models follow a straight line, with a quantity directly proportional to some variable. Hooke's law is an example of a linear model.
Mathematical models have parameters, which are constants based on the specific model, and variables, which are inputs into the model. For example, bacterial population growth could be given by the model b(t) = b02rt. In this model, b0 is a variable that represents the initial number of bacteria, t is a variable for time, and r and 2 are parameters that depend on the growth conditions and mode of reproduction. Scientists can change the variables of a model to predict the outcome of a process under new conditions. Scientists also use models to compare different processes and improve their understanding of the complex systems that make up the world.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account










														
														Additional Info
													



Mathematics to the Rescue!Sarah is working in a laboratory testing new antibiotics. She needs to grow 10 million bacteria for her experiments. If she starts with 10,000 bacteria and grows them in a flask for 24 hours, will she have enough bacteria? Sarah could take samples and count the bacteria using a microscope, but it's finals week, and she doesn't have time. Instead Sarah could quickly calculate how many bacteria she will have grown using a mathematical model, or mathematical representation, of bacterial growth. This will save Sarah time so that she can study for her exams. Score! Math is a universal language, so mathematical models can be used to describe and solve problems in any scientific discipline. In this lesson, we'll explore math models used in biology, chemistry, and physics. 
Biological GrowthFirst, let's solve Sarah's problem. Bacteria reproduce by dividing in half. We can use this fact to model bacterial growth using an exponential growth model, which indicates that the number of bacteria grows exponentially over time. The basic form of the model is b(t) = b0*2rt. Where: 
b(t) is the total number of bacteria at a certain time t. 
b0 is the initial condition or starting number of bacteria, which we know is 10,000. 
r is the exponential growth rate, which is a parameter, or variable specific to our situation. 
Finally, note that the base of the exponent is 2 because every bacterial division produces 2 bacteria. 
Let's assume the exponential growth rate is 0.5. For Sarah's particular situation, at any time t, the model of bacterial growth is b(t) = 10,000*20.5t. Let's see how many bacteria Sarah will have after t = 24 hours. 
b(24) = 10,000*20.5*24 
= 10,000*212 
= 10,000*4,096 
= 40,960,000. 
There will be 40,960,000 bacteria after 24 hours of growth - plenty for Sarah's experiments! 

   A graph of bacterial growth over time 
 





The Chemistry of DecayMegan is a paleontologist trying to determine the age of a fossil. The fossil contains a specific type of carbon called carbon-14, and she knows that carbon-14 decays into nitrogen at an exponential rate. She found that the fossil initially contained 50 grams of carbon-14, but now it only contains 5 grams. How old is the fossil? Since the amount of carbon-14 decays exponentially, we can use an exponential model again. But instead of using an exponential growth model, we will use an exponential decay model, which indicates that the amount of carbon-14 is decreasing exponentially over time. The basic form of the model is similar to bacterial growth, but the exponent will be negative to indicate decay. The amount of carbon-14 in the fossil is modeled by: c(t) = c0e-rt We know that the fossil started with 50 grams of carbon-14 (c0 = 50). Megan read that the exponential decay rate of carbon-14 is r = 0.00012. So at any time t, the amount of carbon-14 remaining in the fossil is c(t) = 50e-0.00012t. Note that we are using the mathematical constant e = 2.718… as the base of the exponent to indicate continuous decay. Since there's only 5 grams of carbon-14 left after t years of decay, c(t) = 5. Therefore: 
5 = 50e-0.00012t 
0.1 = e-0.00012t (dividing both sides of the equation by 50) 
ln(0.1) = ln(e-0.00012t) (taking the natural logarithm of both sides of the equation 
ln(0.1) = -0.00012t 
t = ln(0.1)/-0.00012 
= 19,188 
The fossil is 19,188 years old! 

   A graph of the exponential decay of carbon-14 over time 
 








Physics in MotionTom is a physics student studying the motion of a model rocket. He launches the rocket from a building 100 meters above the ground into the air at an initial velocity of 25 meters per second (m/s). How high above the ground will the rocket be 3 seconds after the launch? In mathematical terms, the physics of projectile motion can be represented with a quadratic model, which indicates that the object's height increases over time until it reaches a peak, and then it decreases. The basic form of this quadratic model is: h(t) = -1/2at2 + v0t + h0. 
h(t) indicates height at time t 
h0 is the initial height, which we know is 100 meters 
v0 is the initial velocity, which we know is 25 m/s 
a is the acceleration due to gravity, which is known to be 9.8 m/s2 
Tom's particular situation is thus modeled by the equation: h(t) = -1/2*9.8t2 + 25t + 100 = -4.9t2 + 25t + 100. The height of the rocket at t = 3 seconds will be: 
h(3) = -4.9*(3)2 + 25*(3) + 100 
= -44.1 + 75 + 100 
= 130.9 
The rocket will be 130.9 meters above the ground. 

  A graph of the height of a rocket over time
 





Lesson SummaryMathematical models are mathematical representations of real-world problems. Scientists use many types of math models, including: 
exponential growth models to describe quantities that grow exponentially 
exponential decay models to describe quantities that decrease exponentially 
quadratic models to describe quantities that first increase to a peak and then decrease 
The models contain parameters, or variables specific to the situation being modeled, and an initial condition, or starting value, is often needed for the quantity being modeled. Math is a universal language, so math models can be used to help solve problems in any scientific discipline!






			
				
				
					To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
				
			
			
			
Create your account













Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?


				I am a student
			

 I am a teacher
			



Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 30 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In

 Back
					


Resources created by teachers for teachers
Over 30,000 video lessons
		& teaching resources‐all
		in one place.
	






Video lessons





Quizzes & Worksheets





Classroom Integration





Lesson Plans



I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues. It’s like a teacher waved a magic wand and did the work for me. I feel like it’s a lifeline.



			Jennifer B.
		

				Teacher
				
				
			

































    
    
		Try it now
	




 Back
	











		Start today. Try it now
		








TExES Mathematics 7-12 (235) Prep


48 chapters |
				
					
					
						435 lessons
						
					
				
			






Ch 1. 
									
										About the TExES Math 7-12 Exam










Ch 2. 
									
										Real Numbers










Ch 3. 
									
										Mathematical Models










Ch 4. 
									
										Complex Numbers & the Complex...










Ch 5. 
									
										Number Theory










Ch 6. 
									
										Number Patterns










Ch 7. 
									
										Functions and Graphs










Ch 8. 
									
										Linear Functions










Ch 9. 
									
										Quadratic Functions &...










Ch 10. 
									
										Evaluating Piecewise & Composite...










Ch 11. 
									
										Rational and Radical Functions










Ch 12. 
									
										Inequalities and Absolute Values










Ch 13. 
									
										Exponentials & Logs










Ch 14. 
									
										The Unit Circle










Ch 15. 
									
										Trigonometric Functions










Ch 16. 
									
										Using a Scientific Calculator for...










Ch 17. 
									
										Understanding Limits in Math










Ch 18. 
									
										Understanding Rate of Change










Ch 19. 
									
										Calculating Derivatives of...










Ch 20. 
									
										Derivatives and Graphs










Ch 21. 
									
										Optimization in Calculus










Ch 22. 
									
										Definite Integrals and Sums










Ch 23. 
									
										Integration Applications in...










Ch 24. 
									
										Working with Measurement










Ch 25. 
									
										Finding Volume, Area & Perimeter










Ch 26. 
									
										Introduction to Proofs and...










Ch 27. 
									
										Congruence and Similarity










Ch 28. 
									
										Triangles










Ch 29. 
									
										Circles










Ch 30. 
									
										Real World Shapes










Ch 31. 
									
										Coordinate Geometry










Ch 32. 
									
										Understanding Transformations in...










Ch 33. 
									
										Conic Sections










Ch 34. 
									
										Understanding Vectors










Ch 35. 
									
										Measuring & Displaying Data










Ch 36. 
									
										Data Distribution Overview










Ch 37. 
									
										Sampling in Statistics










Ch 38. 
									
										Distribution & Inference in...










Ch 39. 
									
										Inference About a Mean










Ch 40. 
									
										Regression and Correlation










Ch 41. 
									
										Finding Probability










Ch 42. 
									
										Probability Distributions and...










Ch 43. 
									
										Experiments and Surveys










Ch 44. 
              Mathematical Process & Perspectives






							Mathematical Proof | Definition, Parts & Example
					

							  










3:41
						 



							Reasoning in Mathematics: Connective Reasoning
					

							  










8:16
						 



							Inductive Reasoning in Math | Definition & Examples
					

							  










7:03
						 



							Mathematical Problem | Definition, Principles & Uses
					

							  










7:50
						 



							Using Multiple Representations of a Mathematical Concept
					



							Math in Art | Overview, Types & Examples
					

							  










3:18
						 



							Mathematical Models in Science | Definition & Examples
					





							  










7:42
						 
Next Lesson






Mathematics for Social Sciences | Uses & Examples




							How Mathematical Models are Used in Business
					

							  










5:49
						 



							Communicating Mathematical Ideas Using a Variety of Representations
					

							  










5:29
						 







Ch 45. 
									
										Teaching Strategies & Activities for...










Ch 46. 
									
										Differentiated Instructional Strategies...










Ch 47. 
									
										Using Student Assessments in the Math...










Ch 48. 
									
										TExES Mathematics 7-12...












Mathematical Models in Science | Definition & Examples Related Study Materials




Related Topics






Browse by Courses
Praxis Mathematics (5165) Prep
ILTS School Psychologist (237) Prep
ILTS Business, Marketing, and Computer Education (216) Prep
FTCE School Psychologist PK-12 (036) Prep
SAT Subject Test Chemistry: Practice and Study Guide
SAT Subject Test US History: Practice and Study Guide
ILTS Science - Chemistry (240) Prep
Praxis Environmental Education (0831) Prep
FTCE Earth/Space Science 6-12 (008) Prep
FTCE School Counseling PK-12 (018) Prep
ILTS Social Science - Sociology and Anthropology (249) Prep
GMAT Test: Online Prep and Review
CSET Science Subtest II Earth and Space Sciences (219): Test Prep & Study Guide
FTCE Middle Grades English 5-9 (014) Prep
Praxis Psychology (5391) Prep






Browse by Lessons
Mathematical Model | Definition, Types & Examples
Using Mathematical Models to Solve Problems
Linear Model | Equation & Examples
How Mathematical Models are Used in Business
Mathematics for Social Sciences | Uses & Examples
Using Nonlinear Functions in Real Life Situations
Static Vs Dynamic Simulation in Quantitative Analysis
Descriptive Modeling in Math | Definition, Accuracy & Examples
Planning a Mathematics Lesson to Align with TEKS
Mathematical Modeling - Hardy-Weinberg: Biology Lab
Order of Magnitude: Analysis & Problems
Abstract Equation: Definition & Concept
Point-Slope Form | Definition, Examples & Graph
Finding the Derivative of 2sinxcosx
How to Integrate sec(5x): Steps & Tutorial














				Create an account to start this course today
			

						  
							  Used by over 30 million students worldwide
						  
						  
                


				  Create an account
		













Like this lesson



Share




Explore our library of over 88,000 lessons


Search











Browse


						Browse by subject
					


College Courses

Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses



High School Courses

AP
Common Core
GED

High School
See All High School Courses



Other Courses

College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses













Upgrade to enroll
×


Upgrade to Premium to enroll in TExES Mathematics 7-12 (235) Prep
Enrolling in a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams.




Track course progress




Take quizzes and exams




Earn certificates of completion



			You will also be able to:
			
Create a Goal
Create custom courses
Get your questions answered




Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!

			Upgrade Now
		
Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!











Download the app




























Plans

Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars® Solutions
Online tutoring



About Us

Blog
Careers
Teach For Us
Press Center
Ambassador
Scholarships





Support

FAQ
Site Feedback



Download the app
























Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community








©  Copyright 2024 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		





Terms of Use  
Privacy Policy  
DMCA Notice  
ADA Compliance  
Honor Code For Students


















×








