





Michael Faraday - Magnet Academy




































Skip to main content










The National MagLab is funded by the National Science Foundation and the State of Florida.


































          Menu
          




  Watch & Play



 Watch & Play
                See the science at play in these electrifying demonstrations and animations that illuminate the invisible electromagnetic forces. Or have your own fun with puzzles, games and a collection of interactive tutorials.




 Interactive Tutorials
These demonstrations about laws and tools associated with electricity and magnetism allow you to adjust variables at and to visualize invisible forces — which makes them almost better than the real thing.


 See-Thru Science
Seeing is believing. In these animations, we show you what electricity and magnetism might look like if they weren't invisible.


 Game & Quizzes
Learn about electricity and magnetism — and have some fun while you're at it!


 Science Demos
How do Maglev trains work? What are comets made of? How do bugs walk on water? This section demonstrates these and other concepts related to magnetism, electricity and other areas of science.







 Read Science Stories 



  Read Science Stories 
                Whether you prefer science stories that are short & sweet, long & detailed, or in graphic form, these stories spell out the basics of electricity and magnetism and the exciting discoveries that magnets enable in easy-to-understand language.




  Science simplified 
Whether you prefer your science short & sweet or long & detailed, we spell it out for you here in easy-to-understand language.
 Comic Collection
Read fun science stories told in comic strip style.
 The Art of Science 
There is beauty and art in science. Gaze on these stories of discoveries that could be featured on museum walls instead of scientific journals.


 Left Fields
Explore these surprising, unconventional and sometimes downright strange stories about high magnetic field research.
 Science Step-by-Step 
These special science graphics explain science stories in digestible steps and include optional detours for readers wanting more background to customize your reading journey.







Explore History



  Explore History
                    Electricity and magnetism discoveries span the centuries. Peruse the people, products and places related to electricity & magnetism from across space and time.




 Pioneers
Get to know these pioneers who went down in history for their groundbreaking work, including scientists behind common terms such as Amp, Celsius, Kelvin, hertz and tesla.


  Museum
From the world's first compass to the magnetic force microscope and beyond, explore a variety of instruments, tools and machines throughout history.


  Timeline
Our timeline takes you through the highlights of electricity and magnetism and across the centuries.


  Places
Take a field trip to these high magnetic field landmarks around the globe.







Try This at Home



 Try This at Home
                  Science can happen anywhere! Try these hands-on science activities at home, school, club, or wherever you might find yourself! They’re easy, fun and can be done with stuff you have around the house.




Activity Books
Atomic Ornament
Brain Cerebrum Hat
Candy Neuron
Crystal Growing
DIY Kaleidoscope
Drawing Magnetic Field Lines
Fill-in Fractal


Make a Compass Activity
Makeshift Magnets
Making Electromagnets
Making Ferrofluids
Möbius Strip
See Iron in Food
Shapeshifting Slime







 Plan a Lesson



   Plan a Lesson
          Looking for a lesson plan for science class or to incorporate science concepts into other subjects? These lessons plans offer detailed directions for K12 teachers to conduct hands-on lessons and align with next generation science standards. 


Compasses
Demagnetizing
Electric Motors
Electromagnets
Magnet Exploration


Magnetic Putty
Magnetizing and Unmagnetizing
Making a Circuit
Pancake Particles
Plotting Electric Field Lines





















 Michael Faraday
A self-educated man with a brilliant mind, Michael Faraday was born in a hardscrabble neighborhood in London.









  






Through the combination of insatiable curiosity and a powerful will to succeed, he transcended his austere beginnings to conduct some of the most groundbreaking work of his day, discovering the principles that lay behind two key instruments of applied electricity: electromagnetic induction, which led to the transformer, and magneto-electric induction, which led to the generator. For these contributions to science (and many others), Faraday is one of the most revered scientists of the 19th century.
Faraday was one of four children, all of whom barely had enough to eat. His formal education was curtailed by a dramatic incident in the classroom. The prevailing educational philosophy of the day was, “spare the whip, spoil the child”, and that attitude, combined with a speech impediment, led to the school master one day beating young Michael so severely that he could not move off the classroom floor. The brutal event turned out to be his final day in school, as his mother decided he would leave public education forever.
At age 13, he got a job in a bookbinding shop, reading every book on which he worked. He developed special interest in science, particularly in electricity and magnetism. Faraday soon turned his home into a lab, teaching himself the fundamentals of chemistry and physics. In one of his first experiments, he fashioned a crude electrostatic generator using old bottles and pieces of wood.
The visionary scientist received his first big break when fellow countryman Sir Humphry Davy, one of the greatest scientific minds of the time, invited him to lectures on chemicals. Faraday was so moved by the experience that he made a bound copy of his notes and had them delivered to Davy in the hope of securing employment. Eventually, Faraday was hired as a laboratory assistant and learned chemistry at the side of one of the greatest scientists of the era. Taking full advantage of the break he had been given, he impressed Davy and his staff with his eager, yet humble, manner, and Farady’s career began to flourish.
He helped advance development of the battery by showing that layers of sheets of zinc amidst other chemicals could produce an electric charge. Other breakthroughs occurred when Faraday found the motion of a magnet inside a wire coil could produce electricity. All of this was a precursor to his discovery of electromagnetic induction: the use of an electromagnetic effect on a charged wire to generate power in an alternate wire. His findings in this area would later be the basis for the electric transformer, a device that produces a consistent electric current, also known as magneto-electric induction. To achieve that steady stream of electricity, Faraday created the first generator by spinning a copper disc between the opposite poles of a horseshoe magnet.
These developments evolved into the electric motors, generators and transformers in use today. Some of his later work involved the relationship between magnetism and light. The “Faraday effect” posits that a powerful magnetic field can influence the alignment of polarized light, a scientific consideration that has applications ranging from the molecular level to the magnetic fields surrounding earth. These results validated the presumed relationship between magnetic force and light. It was mainly the result of his efforts that electricity moved from the realm of scientific curiosity to being a principal component in technology.
Although he had no formal education or a degree, later in life Faraday became professor of chemistry at the Royal Institution. He had a commanding presence as a lecturer and his speeches were popular.
Nearly a decade of nonstop experimentation and theoretical research led to a nervous breakdown in 1839. Over the next several years, Faraday performed little in-depth science, and it was not until 1845 that he was able to advance work he had started years earlier.
Faraday is considered one of the most influential scientists, and perhaps the finest experimentalist, in history. As a measure of his influence, consider that many analytical terms bear his name. In addition to the aforementioned “Faraday effect”, they include the unit of capacitance, known as the farad, as well as the Faraday constant, the charge on a group of electrons. 





More Stories



 
  Joseph Henry 



 
  William Shockley 



 
  Peter Debye 










Chemistry
Physics


































 

© 2024 National MagLab
Funded by the National Science Foundation (DMR-2128556) and the State of Florida.
Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.



Site Feedback
Privacy Policy
Contact











‹
›
×














