 









Niels Bohr – Facts - NobelPrize.org
















 



















 




Skip to content 















Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed



Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed





Close Mobile Menu






Toggle Mobile Menu 





Nobel Prizes & laureates

All Nobel Prizes
Nobel Prizes 2023
Physics prize
Chemistry prize
Medicine prize
Literature prize
Peace prize
Prize in economic sciences


About

About the prize
Alfred Nobel
Award ceremonies
Nomination
Organisation


Stories
Educational
Events & museums



Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed



Close the search form
A button that allows you to close the search form if needed











Header Search 



Submit a search term
Allows users to submit a search term










		Enhanced Page Navigation	



					Niels Bohr - Facts				










The Nobel Prize in Physics 1922 





Summary

LaureatesNiels Bohr

Facts



Biographical



Nobel Lecture



Banquet speech



Nominations



Documentary



Photo gallery



Other resources



Presentation Speech





Share this 





Facebook 






X 






LinkedIn 






Email this page 









Niels Bohr 
Facts


Navigate to:
 Summary-- Facts-- Biographical-- Nobel Lecture-- Banquet speech-- Nominations-- Documentary-- Photo gallery-- Other resources Presentation Speech

Photo from the Nobel Foundation archive. 


Niels Henrik David Bohr
The Nobel Prize in Physics 1922 
Born: 7 October 1885, Copenhagen, Denmark 
Died: 18 November 1962, Copenhagen, Denmark 

Affiliation at the time of the award:
Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark 

Prize motivation: “for his services in the investigation of the structure of atoms and of the radiation emanating from them” 

Prize share: 1/1 



Life 

Niels Bohr was born and raised in Copenhagen. After his doctorate, he spent a number of years abroad, including in Manchester and Cambridge, before returning to Denmark to become head of Copenhagen University's Institute for Theoretical Physics (now the Niels Bohr Institute). The Institute became a legendary research environment and a center for the development of quantum physics. Bohr became one of Denmark's most famous and acclaimed people and a central figure in 20th century physics.




Work 

The discovery of the electron and radioactivity in the late 19th century led to different models being proposed for the atom’s structure. In 1913, Niels Bohr proposed a theory for the hydrogen atom, based on quantum theory that some physical quantities only take discrete values. Electrons move around a nucleus, but only in prescribed orbits, and If electrons jump to a lower-energy orbit, the difference is sent out as radiation. Bohr’s model explained why atoms only emit light of fixed wavelengths, and later incorporated the theories on light quanta. 




To cite this section 
MLA style: Niels Bohr – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2024. Wed. 12 Jun 2024. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1922/bohr/facts/> 



Back to top 

Back To Top
Takes users back to the top of the page

















Nobel Prizes and laureates







Nobel Prizes 2023 




Eleven laureates were awarded a Nobel Prize in 2023, for achievements that have conferred the greatest benefit to humankind. Their work and discoveries range from effective mRNA vaccines and attosecond physics to fighting against the oppression of women.See them all presented here. 


 





Explore prizes and laureates 

Look for popular awards and laureates in different fields, and discover the history of the Nobel Prize. 




Select the category or categories you would like to filter by 


Physics 

Chemistry 

Medicine 

Literature 

Peace 

Economic Sciences 



Select the category or categories you would like to filter by




Physics 






Chemistry 






Medicine 






Literature 






Peace 






Economic Sciences 





Decrease the year by one 

- 

Choose a year you would like to search in 


Increase the year by one 

+ 



Explore 















About the Nobel Prize organisation 



The Nobel Foundation 
Tasked with a mission to manage Alfred Nobel's fortune and has ultimate responsibility for fulfilling the intentions of Nobel's will.



The prize-awarding institutions 
For more than a century, these academic institutions have worked independently to select Nobel Prize laureates.



Outreach organisations 
Several outreach organisations and activities have been developed to inspire generations and disseminate knowledge about the Nobel Prize.





Press
Contact
FAQ



Privacy policy
Technical support
Terms of use



For developers
Media player




Join us 
 
Facebook

 
Twitter

 
Instagram

 
Youtube

 
LinkedIn








The Nobel Prize 



Copyright © Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2024 

















