







Numerical and Computational Methods - PHYS6110 - Modules - University of Kent































Jump to content








The University of Kent









Search icon







cross


















cross
















Modules


Menu






Choosing your modules




How to apply




Planning your career




Student profiles















University of Kent
Courses
Modules
Numerical and Computational Methods


Numerical and Computational Methods - PHYS6110
Looking for a different module?





Module delivery information

This module is not currently running in 2024 to 2025.







Overview
This module provides a foundation in numerical approximations to analytical methods – these techniques are essential for solving problems by computer. An indicative list of methods is: Linear equations, zeros and roots, least squares & linear regression, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, errors and finite differences, linear programming, interpolation and plotting functions, numerical integration, numerical differentiation, solutions to ordinary differential equations using numerical methods.
Details
Contact hours
Total Contact Hours: 32
Total Private Study Hours: 118
Total Study Hours: 150
Availability
This is not available as a wild module.
Method of assessment
Problem Sheet 1 (3 hours) – 20%
Problem Sheet 2 (3 hours) – 20%
Problem Sheet 3 (3 hours) – 20%
Problem Sheet 4 (3 hours) – 20%
Problem Sheet 5 (3 hours) – 20%
Indicative reading
Chapra, S. (2008). Applied Numerical Methods with MATLAB for Engineers and Scientists. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Moler, C. (2004). Numerical Computing with MATLAB, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia: SIAM.
See the library reading list for this module (Canterbury)
Learning outcomes
The intended subject specific learning outcomes. On successfully completing the module students will be able to:
Demonstrate the ability to identify relevant principles and laws when dealing with problems, and to make approximations necessary to obtain solutions.
Demonstrate a systematic ability to solve problems in physics using appropriate mathematical tools.
Demonstrate a confident ability to use mathematical techniques and analysis to model physical behaviour.
Demonstrate an assured ability to solve advanced problems in physics using appropriate mathematical tools, to translate problems into mathematical statements and apply their knowledge to obtain order of magnitude or more precise solutions as appropriate.
Demonstrate the ability to accurately interpret mathematical descriptions of physical phenomena.
Display a working knowledge of a variety of mathematical and/or computational techniques applicable to current research within physics.
Demonstrate complete competence in the use of appropriate C&IT packages/systems for the analysis of data and the retrieval of appropriate information.
Present and interpret information graphically accurately and confidently.
Demonstrate the ability to make use of appropriate texts, or other learning resources as part of managing their own learning.

The intended generic learning outcomes. On successfully completing the module students will be able to:
Demonstrate extensive problem-solving skills in the context of both problems with well-defined solutions and open-ended problems; an ability to formulate problems in precise terms and to identify key issues, and the confidence to try different approaches in order to make progress on challenging problems. Numeracy is subsumed within this area.
Demonstrate professional analytical skills associated with the need to pay attention to detail and to develop an ability to manipulate precise and intricate ideas, to construct logical arguments and to use technical language correctly.

Notes



ECTS credits are recognised throughout the EU and allow you to transfer credit easily from one university to another.
The named convenor is the convenor for the current academic session.

Back to top



						University of Kent makes every effort to ensure that module information is accurate for the relevant academic session and to provide educational services as described. However, courses, services and other matters may be subject to change. Please read our full disclaimer.
					



Key information


Year

							2024 to 2025
						


Pre-requisites

							None
						


Restrictions

							None
						


Documents

Module specification








General information




Contact us



The University of Kent




University of Kent, Canterbury, Kent, CT2 7NZ




Social media links



Connect with us on Facebook





Follow us on X







Follow us on Instagram














Connect with us on LinkedIn










Subscribe to us on Youtube










Subscribe to us on TikTok

















Affiliations





















































































About us
Research
Governance and planning
Access agreements
Transparency return
Modern Slavery Act Statement
Charity information
Locations
Support us
What's on
News
Business services
Career opportunities
Sustainability








Courses
Undergraduates
Postgraduates
International students
Part-time and short courses
Student experience
Accommodation
Fees and funding
Scholarships
Term dates








Applicants
Parents and family
Students
Staff
Alumni
Business and partners
Paying online





Other links

© University of Kent
Accessibility
Contact us
Feedback
Legal
Privacy notice
Cookies
Update your cookie consent









