



Paul Dirac | Quantum Mechanics & Equation | Study.com













































for Teachers
for Schools
for Working Scholars®
for College Credit


























Log In


Sign Up

Menu
					










									Plans
							



									Subjects
							





Art


Business


Computer Science


Education & Teaching


English


Health & Medicine


History


Humanities


Math


Psychology


Science


Social Science







							 
						



									Art
							



									Architecture 




									Art History 




									Design 




									Performing Arts 




									Visual Arts 






							 
						



									Business
							



									Accounting 




									Business Administration 




									Business Communication 




									Business Ethics 




									Business Intelligence 




									Business Law 




									Economics 




									Finance 




									Healthcare Administration 




									Human Resources 




									Information Technology 




									International Business 




									Operations Management 




									Real Estate 




									Sales & Marketing 






							 
						



									Computer Science
							



									Computer Engineering 




									Computer Programming 




									Cybersecurity 




									Data Science 




									Software 






							 
						



									Education & Teaching
							



									Education Law & Policy 




									Pedagogy & Teaching Strategies 




									Special & Specialized Education 




									Student Support in Education 




									Teaching English Language Learners 






							 
						



									English
							



									Grammar 




									Literature 




									Public Speaking 




									Reading 




									Vocabulary 




									Writing & Composition 






							 
						



									Health & Medicine
							



									Counseling & Therapy 




									Health 




									Medicine 




									Nursing 




									Nutrition 






							 
						



									History
							



									US History 




									World History 






							 
						



									Humanities
							



									Communication 




									Ethics 




									Foreign Languages 




									Philosophy 




									Religious Studies 






							 
						



									Math
							



									Algebra 




									Basic Math 




									Calculus 




									Geometry 




									Statistics 




									Trigonometry 






							 
						



									Psychology
							



									Clinical & Abnormal Psychology 




									Cognitive Science 




									Developmental Psychology 




									Educational Psychology 




									Organizational Psychology 




									Social Psychology 






							 
						



									Science
							



									Anatomy & Physiology 




									Astronomy 




									Biology 




									Chemistry 




									Earth Science 




									Engineering 




									Environmental Science 




									Physics 






							 
						



									Social Science
							



									Anthropology 




									Criminal Justice 




									Geography 




									Law 




									Linguistics 




									Political Science 




									Sociology 







									Courses
							





By Subject


By Education Level


Adult Education


Transferable Credit







							By Subject
						



									Arts 




									Business 




									Computer Science 




									Education & Teaching 




									English (ELA) 




									Foreign Language 




									Health & Medicine 




									History 




									Humanities 




									Math 




									Psychology 




									Science 




									Social Science 






							By Education Level
						



									Elementary School 




									Middle School 




									High School 




									College 




									Graduate and Post-Grad 







									Test Prep
							





Teacher Certification Exams


Nursing Exams


Allied Health & Medicine Exams


Real Estate Exams


All Test Prep







							 
						



									Teacher Certification Exams
							



									Praxis 




									FTCE 




									TExES 




									CSET & CBEST 




									More Teacher Certification Test Prep 






							 
						



									Nursing Exams
							



									NCLEX 




									HESI 




									More Nursing Test Prep 






							 
						



									Allied Health & Medicine Exams
							



									ASCP 




									CNA 




									CNS 




									More Medical Test Prep 






							 
						



									Real Estate Exams
							



									Real Estate Sales 




									Real Estate Brokers 




									Real Estate Appraisals 







									Teach
							





Teaching Resources and Curriculum


Skills Practice


Lesson Plans


Teacher Certification


Teacher Professional Development








									Tutoring
							





Math Tutoring


Science Tutoring


Business Tutoring


Humanities Tutoring







							 
						



									Math Tutoring
							



									Algebra  Tutoring




									Calculus  Tutoring




									Geometry  Tutoring




									Pre-calculus  Tutoring




									Statistics  Tutoring




									Trigonometry  Tutoring






							 
						



									Science Tutoring
							



									Biology  Tutoring




									Chemistry  Tutoring




									Physics  Tutoring






							 
						



									Business Tutoring
							



									Accounting  Tutoring




									Economics  Tutoring




									Finance  Tutoring






							 
						



									Humanities Tutoring
							



									History  Tutoring




									Literature  Tutoring




									Writing  Tutoring






Sign Up


































 Science Courses
			
			/
			
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	

	
	
	
		
		
		
		
		
			
Significant Physicists Study Guide
Course




		Paul Dirac | Quantum Mechanics & Equation
	






Lesson



						
							
								Additional Info
							
							
						
					




					André Lopes Marinho, Michael Blosser
			


Author

André Lopes Marinho
André is a Mechanical Engineer from Brazil. He has experience with translation and proofreading of articles in many areas, but science related articles are his expertise. He is currently doing a Master's degree in Material Sciences.

					View bio
				


Instructor

Michael Blosser
Michael has a Masters in Physics and a Masters in International Development. He has over 5 years of teaching experience, teaching Physics, Math, and English classes.

					View bio
				



							Learn about the life, achievements, and scientific contributions of Paul Dirac. Explore Paul's quantum mechanics formalisms, particularly the Paul Dirac equation.
						
								
									Updated: 11/21/2023
								







Frequently Asked Questions



What was Paul Dirac famous for?

Paul Dirac was an English physicist famous for being considered one of the founders of Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Electrodynamics. For the discovery of new productive forms of atomic theory, Dirac won the Nobel Prize in 1933.



How did Paul Dirac discover antimatter?

Through his equation, Dirac describes an electron in the presence of an electromagnetic field. In this context, the solution proposed by Dirac predicts the existence of particles with negative mass, or antimatter, which is only a relativistic concept.



What was Paul Dirac's contribution to quantum theory?

Dirac made fundamental contributions to the early development of quantum mechanics. Among them, one can cite the Dirac equation, which explained the behavior of electrons in the presence of an electromagnetic field and predicted the existence of antimatter.












		Create an account
		




Table of ContentsPaul Dirac Paul's Quantum Mechanics Lesson SummaryShow 






Paul Dirac



Paul Dirac was an English physicist and mathematician widely regarded as one of the founders of Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Electrodynamics. Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac was born on August 8, 1902, in the British city of Bristol. The son of a Swiss father and an English mother, Dirac grew up in Bishopston, a suburban area of Bristol, along with his two siblings. From an early age, Paul showed a remarkable aptitude for mathematical speculation. He studied electrical engineering at the University of Bristol, completing his degree in 1921. In 1923, he graduated in mathematics from the same university and received a research fellowship at St. John's College, in Cambridge. At Cambridge University, Dirac conducted research in theoretical physics under the supervision of Ralph Fowler. In his thesis, he incorporated Heisenberg's Matrix Mechanics and Schroedinger's Wave Mechanics into a single mathematical formalism. With his work, Paul obtained his Ph.D. in Physics in 1926.
Dirac was described by his colleagues as an intelligent and quiet person. His peers considered the scientist's reasoning difficult to follow, but few doubted his genius. In 1937, Paul married Margit (Manci) Wigner, sister of Eugene Wigner, the famous Hungarian physicist. Together with Margit, Dirac raised four children. During his years at Cambridge University, Dirac established himself as one of the world's most prominent physicists. His research led to decisive contributions in the development of Quantum Mechanics. In addition, his studies contributed to the progress of the field of atomistic, the study of the atom. The physicist completed his work at Cambridge in 1969 and moved to the United States in 1970. In the same year, Paul Dirac became a Professor at Florida State University in Tallahassee. He was also a member of the Center for Theoretical Studies at the University of Miami. Paul Dirac lived in Tallahassee until he died in 1984.Paul Dirac's work has earned him numerous awards and accolades. For his contributions to the atomic theory and Quantum Mechanics, Paul Dirac was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1933, together with Erwin Schroedinger. Dirac was also awarded the Royal Medal of the Royal Society (1939), the Coplay Medal of the Royal Society (1952), and the Max Planck Medal (1952). In addition, the British Crown awarded him the Order of Merit in 1973.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account













									Lesson
							



									Quiz
								



									Course
								



						














	
	
							5.4K
							views







Paul's Quantum Mechanics



Quantum Mechanics emerged, among other facts, as a consequence of classical physics' limitations in interpreting electromagnetic radiation and its interaction with matter. A series of discoveries and observations made evident the problems in explaining such phenomena at the level of its fundamental constituents. In this context, the research Paul Dirac conducted is considered a precursor to the creation of the Quantum Mechanics branch. Paul's Quantum Mechanics include:
"Bra-ket" notation: Also known as Dirac notation, it is the standard representation in Quantum Mechanics theory for describing quantum states and wave functions. Dirac created and introduced complex vector spaces called "kets", a representation of a Quantum Mechanics physical state containing all the information from that state. Kets are represented by the symbol "{eq}|> {/eq}" and have a dual element of that state called "bra", represented by the symbol "{eq}<| {/eq}". The dot product of a state is then represented by "{eq}<|> {/eq}" and is called "bra-kets".

Dirac's Equation: It is a relativistic wave equation proposed in 1928 that successfully describes elementary spin {eq}- \frac{1}{2} {/eq} particles, such as the electron. The Dirac equation is a first-order equation and showed that the spin could be easily deduced from the equation, rather than postulated.


Prediction of the antimatter: With his equation, Dirac postulated the existence of antimatter without any experimental evidence. Dirac postulated that since his equation was applicable for any subatomic particle that has the same spin as the electron, then every particle of spin 1/2 has an antiparticle. In 1932, Dirac's prediction was confirmed by Carl Anderson. Anderson conducted a study of cosmic rays and discovered a particle that had the same properties as the electron, except for its electric charge. The particle discovered was called anti-electron, or positron, and was the first detected antimatter particle.
Foundation of Quantum Electrodynamics: The first formulation of Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) is attributed to Paul Dirac, who in 1927 published the paper "The Quantum Theory of the Emission and Absorption of Radiation". In his work, Dirac was able to calculate the spontaneous emission coefficient of an atom, which is the landmark of the creation of Quantum Electrodynamics. In QED, the quantized field theory is applied to the electromagnetic theory. This kind of formulation made it possible to describe phenomena of an electromagnetic nature in the relativistic and quantum domains. This branch of science explains, for example, the interaction of electromagnetic radiation, such as light and matter.
Paul Dirac EquationThe first attempt to unify quantum ideas with Einstein's theory of relativity was proposed in 1927, by physicists Oskar Klein and Walter Gordon. The Klein-Gordon equation, however, has a problem because it is a second-order equation with respect to time. This fact leads to negative values for the probability density of particles, which prohibits the probabilistic interpretation of the theory. In 1928, Dirac solved the problem of negative probability density by proposing a first-order relativistic wave equation for both the temporal and spatial variables. However, Dirac's equation is not perfectly compatible with the theory of relativity because it does not predict the creation and destruction of particles, something that only a quantum field theory could handle. The Paul Dirac equation is given by:{eq}\left(\alpha_{0}mc^{2} + \sum_{j=1}^{3} \alpha_{j}p_{j}c \right )\psi (\mathbf{x}, t) = i\frac{h}{2\pi}\frac{\partial \psi}{\partial t}(\mathbf{x}, t) {/eq}Where m is the rest mass of the electron, c is the speed of light, p is the linear momentum operator h is Planck's constant, x and t are the space and time coordinates, and {eq}\psi(x, t) {/eq} is a wave function with four components. Each {eq}\alpha {/eq} is a linear operator that applies to the wave function.This equation was important for the mathematical foundation of quantum theory. From it, it was possible to improve the concepts of quantum statistics that led to the development of the Fermi-Dirac distribution. This distribution is important in the study of the behavior of electrons in solids and is the theoretical basis responsible for the emergence of electronic devices and semiconductors.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account















Lesson Summary



Paul Dirac (1902-1984) was a British physicist considered to be one of the early pioneers of Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Electrodynamics. Through his studies and work, Dirac established a mathematical foundation for the creation of this new branch of science. Dirac studied at the University of Bristol until 1923 and received his Ph.D. from Cambridge University in 1926. In 1933, Dirac alongside Erwin Schrodinger received the Nobel Prize for their joint work and study on atomic theory. Dirac conducted his research at Cambridge University until 1969 and then moved to the United States. During the last years of his life, he lived in Tallahassee where he was a Professor at Florida State University.Dirac contributed to quantum mechanics by establishing concepts like the "Bra-ket" notation for the representation of wave functions. In addition, he also performed experiments to describe the interaction of matter and light, which is why many credit him with the Foundation of Quantum Electrodynamics. Paul Dirac also formulated the Dirac's Equation, which described the electron spins and consequently the Prediction of the antimatter, or positron, which was confirmed by scientist Carl Anderson in 1932. Dirac's Equation is given by:{eq}\left(\alpha_{0}mc^{2} + \sum_{j=1}^{3} \alpha_{j}p_{j}c \right )\psi (\mathbf{x}, t) = i\frac{h}{2\pi}\frac{\partial \psi}{\partial t}(\mathbf{x}, t) {/eq}






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account










														
														Additional Info
													



Paul Dirac

   Paul Dirac 
 





Paul Dirac was a famous physicist and mathematician who made numerous contributions to the field of physics. He is mostly known for his contributions to the branch of physics called quantum mechanics, and for founding what is now called quantum electrodynamics . As well, he made numerous other contributions including the Dirac equation which predicted the existence of antimatter. This lesson will briefly introduce and discuss these famous contributions and why they were so important to physics. 
The Atomic Model & Quantum MechanicsFrom childhood, Paul Dirac had shown his genius in mathematics and physics in school. After earning a degree in electrical engineering, Dirac decided to go back to the University of Bristol; two years later, in 1923, he graduated with an additional degree in mathematics. After obtaining his two degrees at the University of Bristol, Dirac attended the prestigious St. John's College at University of Cambridge, and graduated with his PhD of physics in 1926. However, Dirac's significant contributions to the field of physics started well before he received his doctorate. When Paul Dirac started his doctorate studies in physics at the University of Cambridge, Niels Bohr's atomic model was seen as the most complete and accurate version at that time. Niels Bohr, another famous physicist, had created an atomic model that placed electrons in circular orbits around the nucleus. These orbits had different energy levels and the electrons could jump to higher energy levels or fall to lower energy levels depending on if the atom was receiving energy from incoming light particles, or photons. However, many other leading physicists at that time were unhappy with Bohr's atomic model, Dirac included. At that time, the field of quantum mechanics , or the study of the physics of particles at the atomic and subatomic level, had recently been created and was already in full swing. Therefore Dirac set out to create a better version. Together with Werner Heisenberg and Erwin Schrodinger, Dirac was able to theorize a new atomic model that represented electrons not as just one number, but as a matrix of numbers. Additionally, during this work, Paul Dirac created new mathematical terminology to represent quantum states, called bra-ket notation, which is still used today. Quantum ElectrodynamicsPaul Dirac is also famous for the creation of the field of quantum electrodynamics. Quantum electrodynamics (usually abbreviated QED) is the study of how light interacts with matter. Paul Dirac founded the field of QED with his paper The Quantum Theory of the Emission and Absorption of Radiation published in 1927. Paul Dirac's QED linked light (electromagnetism) with the quantum world and illustrated how these particles (electrons and photons) interacted with one another. Quantum electrodynamics has since been used to explain a lot of things in our modern world, from how the ground is solid, to lasers, to personal computers, to name just a few examples. Although Paul Dirac had already changed the face of physics with his work on quantum mechanics and quantum electrodynamics, Dirac's contributions to the field of physics was not yet finished. The Dirac Equation & AntimatterDirac's, Heisenberg's, and Schrodinger's work on quantum mechanics provided a much better model for the electron then Bohr's atomic model. However, there was still a problem: their electron model only worked for electrons that were moving relatively slowly; it didn't work for fast-moving electrons, or for electrons moving close to the speed of light. Paul Dirac was not satisfied with this. Therefore he set out to create a new equation, one that would create an electron model within quantum mechanics but also encompass Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity for the electrons moving close to the speed of light. It would also factor in an electron's spin, which the famous physicist Wolfgang Pauli had discovered shortly beforehand. Encompassing all of these elements, Paul Dirac created what is called the Dirac equation, an equation of motion for the wave function of the electron, for all speeds. Once the Dirac equation was published in 1928, the physics community was astounded. It still is regarded as one of the greatest physics papers ever written. 


However, Dirac's equation did produce a confusing result. While mathematically perfect, the Dirac equation had produced twice the amount of electrons then the amount that was previously thought. Dirac, although perplexed, trusted the mathematics in his theory and predicted the existence of antimatter, and in this case the existence of a positiron, a particle that had exactly the same mass and characteristics of an electron but with a positive charge. The existence of antimatter, or antiprotons, antineutrons, and positrons, was proven experimentally only a few years later in 1932 by the physicist Carl Anderson. Due to all of his significant contributions to the field of physics, Paul Dirac was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics with Erwin Schrodinger in 1933 for their study of atomic theory. Paul Dirac published numerous books in his lifetime, many of which are still seen today as the standard bearer texts in the field of physics. His most famous books are: 
Quantum Theory of the Electron (1928) 
The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (1930) 
Lectures on Quantum Mechanics (1966) 
Spinors in Hilbert Space (1974) 
General Theory of Relativity (1975) 
Lesson SummaryPaul Dirac was a famous physicist and brilliant mathematician who made revolutionary and significant contributions to the field of physics. Dirac made significant contributions to the field of quantum mechanics by helping develop a quantum atomic field theory and by developing a better model for electrons in the atomic model, all before he received his doctorate in physics in 1926. Additionally, in 1927, Paul Dirac created the field of quantum electrodynamics, or the theory that describes how light interacts with matter, which today is one of the most important branches of physics. In 1928 Dirac, unsatisfied with how the current quantum model didn't work when electrons were moving near the speed of light, created the famous Dirac Equation which described the relativistic motion of the wave function of the electron and inadvertently predicted the existence of antimatter. Paul Dirac was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics with Erwin Schrodinger in 1933 for their study of atomic theory.






			
				
				
					To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
				
			
			
			
Create your account













Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?


				I am a student
			

 I am a teacher
			



Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 30 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In

 Back
					


Resources created by teachers for teachers
Over 30,000 video lessons
		& teaching resources‐all
		in one place.
	






Video lessons





Quizzes & Worksheets





Classroom Integration





Lesson Plans



I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues. It’s like a teacher waved a magic wand and did the work for me. I feel like it’s a lifeline.



			Jennifer B.
		

				Teacher
				
				
			

































    
    
		Try it now
	




 Back
	











		Start today. Try it now
		




Table of ContentsPaul Dirac Paul's Quantum Mechanics Lesson SummaryShow 






Significant Physicists Study Guide


4 chapters |
				
					
					
						75 lessons
						
					
				
			






Ch 1. 
									
										Contemporary Physicists










Ch 2. 
              Early 20th Century Physicists






							Leo Szilard: Biography & the Atomic Bomb
					



							Louis de Broglie | Biography, Theories & Experiments
					



							Gustav Ludwig Hertz: Biography, Inventions & Contributions
					



							Max Delbruck: Biography & Quotes
					



							Max Delbruck: Accomplishments & Contributions to DNA
					



							Albert Abraham Michelson | Biography, Career & Contributions
					



							Arnold Sommerfeld | Biography, Career & Contributions
					



							C.V. Raman: Biography & Inventions
					

							  










5:32
						 



							Enrico Fermi | Biography & Inventions
					



							Erwin Schrodinger | Discover, Equation & Example
					



							George Gamow: Biography, Facts & Big Bang Theory
					



							Hendrik Lorentz | Nobel Prize, Books & Theory
					



							Homi Jehangir Bhabha: Biography, Inventions & Achievements
					

							  










5:21
						 



							Lise Meitner | Biography, Nuclear Fission Discovery & Legacy
					



							Marguerite Perey | Biography, Discovery & Education
					



							Max Born: Biography & Quotes
					



							Max Born & the Birth of Quantum Mechanics
					



							Max von Laue: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Max von Laue: Crystallography & X-Ray Diffraction
					



							Paul Dirac: Biography & Quotes
					



							Paul Dirac | Quantum Mechanics & Equation
					




Next Lesson
Richard Feynman: Biography & Quotes




							Richard Feynman: Books, Discoveries & Accomplishments
					



							Werner Heisenberg: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Werner Heisenberg | Experiment, Discovery & Achievements
					



							Wolfgang Ernst Pauli: Biography & Quotes
					



							Wolfgang Pauli | Biography, Contributions & Nobel Prize
					



							Maria Goeppert-Mayer: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Maria Goeppert-Mayer & the Nuclear Shell Model
					



							Maria Goeppert-Mayer: Contributions & Accomplishments
					



							Katharine Burr Blodgett: Biography, Inventions & Contributions
					







Ch 3. 
									
										Late 20th Century Physicists










Ch 4. 
									
										Pre-20th Century Physicists












Paul Dirac | Quantum Mechanics & Equation Related Study Materials




Related Topics






Browse by Courses
College Chemistry: Tutoring Solution
High School Chemistry: Help and Review
Physical Science: Help and Review
Middle School Physical Science: Help and Review
Middle School Physical Science: Tutoring Solution
High School Physics: Homework Help Resource
High School Physics: Help and Review
Middle School Earth Science: Tutoring Solution
Middle School Life Science: Help and Review
High School Chemistry: Tutoring Solution
Human Anatomy & Physiology: Help and Review
High School Biology: Homework Help Resource
Microbiology: Help and Review
Pathophysiology: Certificate Program
UExcel Earth Science: Study Guide & Test Prep






Browse by Lessons
Paul Dirac: Biography & Quotes
Diagenesis in Geology | Processes, Stages & Forms
Anatexis & Palingenesis: Definitions & Examples
Microfossils: Definition, Uses & Importance
Microfossils Definition, Importance & Examples
Alluvium Properties, Formation & Composition
Permafrost | Definition, Location & Characteristics
Continental Rise | Definition, Formation & Characteristics
Natural Bridge Definition, Formation & Examples
Drought | History, Types & Causes
Absolute Age Dating | Importance, Types & Examples
Reflection in Physics Project Ideas
Light-Year | Definition, Length & Measurement
Space Missions: Exploration, Discoveries, & Ongoing Studies














				Create an account to start this course today
			

						  
							  Used by over 30 million students worldwide
						  
						  
                


				  Create an account
		













Like this lesson



Share




Explore our library of over 88,000 lessons


Search











Browse


						Browse by subject
					


College Courses

Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses



High School Courses

AP
Common Core
GED

High School
See All High School Courses



Other Courses

College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses













Upgrade to enroll
×


Upgrade to Premium to enroll in Significant Physicists Study Guide
Enrolling in a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams.




Track course progress




Take quizzes and exams




Earn certificates of completion



			You will also be able to:
			
Create a Goal
Create custom courses
Get your questions answered




Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!

			Upgrade Now
		
Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!











Download the app




























Plans

Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars® Solutions
Online tutoring



About Us

Blog
Careers
Teach For Us
Press Center
Ambassador
Scholarships





Support

FAQ
Site Feedback



Download the app
























Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community








©  Copyright 2024 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		





Terms of Use  
Privacy Policy  
DMCA Notice  
ADA Compliance  
Honor Code For Students


















×








