



Philosophy of mathematics - Wikipedia



























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Create account

Log in








Personal tools





 Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Major themes




Toggle Major themes subsection





1.1
Reality








1.2
Logic and rigor








1.3
Relationship with physical reality








1.4
Relationship with sciences






1.4.1
Unreasonable effectiveness












2
History




Toggle History subsection





2.1
Contemporary philosophy










3
Contemporary schools of thought




Toggle Contemporary schools of thought subsection





3.1
Artistic








3.2
Platonism








3.3
Mathematicism








3.4
Logicism








3.5
Formalism








3.6
Conventionalism








3.7
Intuitionism






3.7.1
Constructivism








3.7.2
Finitism










3.8
Structuralism








3.9
Embodied mind theories






3.9.1
Aristotelian realism








3.9.2
Psychologism








3.9.3
Empiricism










3.10
Fictionalism








3.11
Social constructivism








3.12
Beyond the traditional schools






3.12.1
Unreasonable effectiveness








3.12.2
Popper's two senses of number statements








3.12.3
Philosophy of language












4
Arguments




Toggle Arguments subsection





4.1
Indispensability argument for realism








4.2
Epistemic argument against realism










5
Aesthetics








6
Journals








7
See also




Toggle See also subsection





7.1
Related works








7.2
Historical topics










8
Notes








9
References








10
Further reading








11
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Philosophy of mathematics



55 languages




العربيةAzərbaycancaবাংলাभोजपुरीБългарскиCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתLatinaMagyarМакедонскиBahasa Melayuမြန်မာဘာသာNederlands日本語Norsk nynorskOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt吴语粵語中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia




This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Philosophy of mathematics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. (August 2021)
The neutrality of this article is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
This article is missing information about the point of view of notable mathematicians and many important philosophical problems, such as the relationship between mathematics and other sciences. Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (November 2022)

 (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Part of a series onMathematics
History
Index

Areas
Number theory
Geometry
Algebra
Calculus and Analysis
Discrete mathematics
Logic and Set theory
Probability
Statistics and Decision theory

Relationship with sciences
Physics
Chemistry
Geosciences
Computation
Biology
Linguistics
Economics
Philosophy
Education


 Mathematics Portalvte
Philosophy of mathematics is the branch of philosophy that deals with the nature of mathematics and its relationship with other human activities.
Major themes that are dealt with in philosophy of mathematics include:

Reality: The question is whether mathematics is a pure product of human mind or whether it has some reality by itself.
Logic and rigor
Relationship with physical reality
Relationship with science
Relationship with applications
Mathematical truth
Nature as human activity (science, art, game, or all together)

Major themes[edit]
Reality[edit]
The connection between mathematics and material reality has led to philosophical debates since at least the time of Pythagoras. The ancient philosopher Plato argued that abstractions that reflect material reality have themselves a reality that exists outside space and time. As a result, the philosophical view that mathematical objects somehow exist on their own in abstraction is often referred to as Platonism. Independently of their possible philosophical opinions, modern mathematicians may be generally considered as Platonists, since they think of and talk of their objects of study as real objects (see Mathematical object).[1]
Armand Borel summarized this view of mathematics reality as follows, and provided quotations of G. H. Hardy, Charles Hermite, Henri Poincaré and Albert Einstein that support his views.[2]

 Something becomes objective (as opposed to "subjective") as soon as we are convinced that it exists in the minds of others in the same form as it does in ours and that we can think about it and discuss it together.[3] Because the language of mathematics is so precise, it is ideally suited to defining concepts for which such a consensus exists. In my opinion, that is sufficient to provide us with a feeling of an objective existence, of a reality of mathematics ...
Logic and rigor[edit]
See also: Logic, Mathematics § Rigor, and Mathematics § Mathematical logic and set theory
Mathematical reasoning requires rigor. This means that the definitions must be absolutely unambiguous and the proofs must be reducible to a succession of applications of syllogisms or inference rules,[a] without any use of empirical evidence and intuition.[b][4]
The rules of rigorous reasoning have been established by the ancient Greek philosophers under the name of logic. Logic is not specific to mathematics, but, in mathematics, the standard of rigor is much higher than elsewhere. 
For many centuries, logic, although used for mathematical proofs, belonged to philosophy and was not specifically studied by mathematicians.[5] Circa the end of the 19th, several paradoxes made questionable the logical foundation of mathematics, and consequently the validity of the whole mathematics. This has been called the foundational crisis of mathematics. Some of these paradoxes consist of results that seem to contradict the common intuition, such as the possibility of construct valid non-Euclidean geometries in which the parallel postulate is wrong, the Weierstrass function that is continuous but nowhere of differentiable, and the study by Georg Cantor of infinite sets, which led to consider several sizes of infinity (infinite cardinals). Even more striking, Russell's paradox shows that the phrase "the set of all sets" is self contradictory.
Several methods have been proposed to solve the problem by changing of logical framework, such as  constructive mathematics and intuitionistic logic. Roughly speaking, the first one consists of requiring that every existence theorem must provide an explicit example, and the second one excludes from mathematical reasoning the law of excluded middle and double negation elimination. 
The problems of foundation of mathematics has been eventually resolved with the rise of mathematical logic as a new area of mathematics. In this framework, a mathematical or logical theory consists of a formal language that defines the well-formed of assertions, a set of basic assertions called axioms and a set of inference rules that allow producing new assertions from one or several known assertions. A theorem of such a theory is either an axiom or an assertion that can be obtained from previously known theorems by the application of an inference rule. The Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice, generally called ZFC, is such a theory in which all mathematics have been restated; it is used implicitely in all mathematics texts that do not specify explicitly on which foundations they are based. Moreover, the other proposed foundations can be modeled and studyed inside ZFC.
It results that "rigor" is no more a relevant concept in mathematics, as a proof is either correct or erroneous, and a "rigorous proof" is simply a pleonasm. Where a special concept of rigor comes into play is in the socialized aspects of a proof. In particular, proofs are rarely written in full details, and some steps of a proof are generally considered as trivial, easy, or straightforward, and therefore left to the reader. As most proof errors occur in these skipped steps, a new proof requires to be verified by other specialists of the subject, and can be considered as reliable only after having been accepted by the community of the specialists, which may need several years.[6]
Also, the concept of "rigor" may remain useful for teaching to beginners what is a mathematical proof.[7]

Relationship with physical reality[edit]
Before the 19th century, the basic mathematical concepts, such as points, lines, natural numbers, real numbers (used for measurements), etc. were abstractions from the physical world, and it was commonly considered that it was sufficient for defining them.[c]
As a consequence of this closeness to physical reality, mathematicians were very cautious when problems they want to solve led them to introduce new concepts that are not directly related the real world. These precautions are still reflected in modern terminology, where the numbers that are not quotient of natural numbers are called irrational numbers, originally meaning that reason cannot conceive them. Similarly, real numbers are the numbers that can be used for measurement, while imaginary numbers cannot.
During the 19th century, there were an active research for giving more precise definitions to the basic concepts resulting of abstraction from the real world; for example Peano arithmetic for natural numbers, the formal definitions of limit, series (infinite sums that may have a finite sums), and continuity by Cauchy and Weierstrass, the definition of real numbers by Cauchy and Dedekind. These formal definitions allowed to prove counterintuitive results, which are a part of the origin of the foundational crisis of mathematics. For example, Weierstrass function is a function that is everywhere continuous and nowhere differentiable. Since the existence of such a monster seemed impossible, people had two choices: either they accept such unrealistic facts, which implies that mathematics does not need to reflect the physical reality; or they changes the logical rules for excluding such monsters. The first choice led to the philosophical school of formalism; in its strong form this school may be understood as the fact that mathematicians must not take care of the physical reality. The second choice led to intuitionism and constructivism.
After strong debates, axiomatic approach became eventually a de facto norm in mathematics. This mean that mathematical theories must be based on axioms (basic assumptions that are considered as true) and a fixed set of inference rules; the theory consists of the results (theorems) that can be deduced (proved) from the axiom by using inference rules, and inference rules only. The entities (mathematical objects) involved in the axioms are considered as defined by the axioms, and nothing else is supposed on their nature. For example, plane geometry can be axiomatized with two sorts of objects, the points and the lines, and a relation "belonging to" or "passing through" that relates points and lines. One of the axioms is "there is exactly one line that passes through two points". The interpretation of points and lines (of the theory) as usual points and lines does not matter at all for the validity of the theory. This means that one can verify the correctness of a proof without referring to any figure, and that a proved theorem remains true independently of any interpretation of the entities involved in the axioms. For example, in plane projective geometry, one may interpret points as lines and vice versa. This implies that for every theorem relating points and lines, one gets immediately a new theorem by exchanging the role of the points and the lines (see duality). Nevertheless the interpretation of the objects of a theory in terms of physical reality (when possible) or of previously studied abstractions remains fundamental for guiding the choice of the axioms, understanding the subject of the theory, and follow the steps of a long proof.
This axiomatic approach has been applied to the whole mathematics, through ZFC, the Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice. The whole mathematics has been rebuilt inside this theory. Except if the contrary is explicitly stated, all modern mathematical texts use it as a foundation of mathematics.
As a consequence, the relationship between mathematics and physical reality is no more a mathematical question, but the nature of this relationship remains a philosophical question that does not have any uncontroversial answer.

Relationship with sciences[edit]
Mathematics is used in most sciences for modeling phenomena, which then allows predictions to be made from experimental laws.[8] The independence of mathematical truth from any experimentation implies that the accuracy of such predictions depends only on the adequacy of the model.[9] Inaccurate predictions, rather than being caused by invalid mathematical concepts, imply the need to change the mathematical model used.[10] For example, the perihelion precession of Mercury could only be explained after the emergence of Einstein's general relativity, which replaced Newton's law of gravitation as a better mathematical model.[11]
There is still a philosophical debate whether mathematics is a science. However, in practice, mathematicians are typically grouped with scientists, and mathematics shares much in common with the physical sciences. Like them, it is falsifiable, which means in mathematics that, if a result or a theory is wrong, this can be proved by providing a counterexample. Similarly as in science, theories and results (theorems) are often obtained from experimentation.[12] In mathematics, the experimentation may consist of computation on selected examples or of the study of figures or other representations of mathematical objects (often mind representations without physical support). For example, when asked how he came about his theorems, Gauss once replied "durch planmässiges Tattonieren" (through systematic experimentation).[13] However, some authors emphasize that mathematics differs from the modern notion of science by not relying on empirical evidence.[14][15][16][17]

Unreasonable effectiveness[edit]
The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics is a phenomenon that was named and first made explicit by physicist Eugene Wigner.[18] It is the fact that many mathematical theories (even the "purest") have applications outside their initial object. These applications may be completely outside their initial area of mathematics, and may concern physical phenomena that were completely unknown when the mathematical theory was introduced.[19] Examples of unexpected applications of mathematical theories can be found in many areas of mathematics.
A notable example is the prime factorization of natural numbers that was discovered more than 2,000 years before its common use for secure internet communications through the RSA cryptosystem.[20] A second historical example is the theory of ellipses. They were studied by the ancient Greek mathematicians as conic sections (that is, intersections of cones with planes). It is almost 2,000 years later that Johannes Kepler discovered that the trajectories of the planets are ellipses.[21]
In the 19th century, the internal development of geometry (pure mathematics) led to definition and study of non-Euclidean geometries, spaces of dimension higher than three and manifolds. At this time, these concepts seemed totally disconnected from the physical reality, but at the beginning of the 20th century, Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity that uses fundamentally these concepts. In particular, spacetime of special relativity is a non-Euclidean space of dimension four, and spacetime of general relativity is a (curved) manifold of dimension four.[22][23]
A striking aspect of the interaction between mathematics and physics is when mathematics drives research in physics. This is illustrated by the discoveries of the positron and the baryon 




Ω

−


.


{\displaystyle \Omega ^{-}.}

 In both cases, the equations of the theories had unexplained solutions, which led to conjecture of the existence of an unknown particle, and the search for these particles. In both cases, these particles were discovered a few years later by specific experiments.[2][24][25]

History[edit]
Pythagoras is considered the father of mathematics and geometry as he set the foundation for Euclid and Euclidean geometry. Pythagoras was the founder of Pythagoreanism: a mathematical and philosophical model to map the universe.
The origin of mathematics is of arguments and disagreements. Whether the birth of mathematics was by chance or induced by necessity during the development of similar subjects, such as physics, remains an area of contention.[26][27]
Many thinkers have contributed their ideas concerning the nature of mathematics. Today, some[who?] philosophers of mathematics aim to give accounts of this form of inquiry and its products as they stand, while others emphasize a role for themselves that goes beyond simple interpretation to critical analysis. There are traditions of mathematical philosophy in both Western philosophy and Eastern philosophy. Western philosophies of mathematics go as far back as Pythagoras, who described the theory "everything is mathematics" (mathematicism), Plato, who paraphrased Pythagoras, and studied the ontological status of mathematical objects, and Aristotle, who studied logic and issues related to infinity (actual versus potential).
Greek philosophy on mathematics was strongly influenced by their study of geometry. For example, at one time, the Greeks held the opinion that 1 (one) was not a number, but rather a unit of arbitrary length. A number was defined as a multitude. Therefore, 3, for example, represented a certain multitude of units, and was thus "truly" a number. At another point, a similar argument was made that 2 was not a number but a fundamental notion of a pair. These views come from the heavily geometric straight-edge-and-compass viewpoint of the Greeks: just as lines drawn in a geometric problem are measured in proportion to the first arbitrarily drawn line, so too are the numbers on a number line measured in proportion to the arbitrary first "number" or "one".[citation needed]
These earlier Greek ideas of numbers were later upended by the discovery of the irrationality of the square root of two. Hippasus, a disciple of Pythagoras, showed that the diagonal of a unit square was incommensurable with its (unit-length) edge: in other words he proved there was no existing (rational) number that accurately depicts the proportion of the diagonal of the unit square to its edge. This caused a significant re-evaluation of Greek philosophy of mathematics. According to legend, fellow Pythagoreans were so traumatized by this discovery that they murdered Hippasus to stop him from spreading his heretical idea.[28] Simon Stevin was one of the first in Europe to challenge Greek ideas in the 16th century. Beginning with Leibniz, the focus shifted strongly to the relationship between mathematics and logic. This perspective dominated the philosophy of mathematics through the time of Frege and of Russell, but was brought into question by developments in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

Contemporary philosophy[edit]
A perennial issue in the philosophy of mathematics concerns the relationship between logic and mathematics at their joint foundations. While 20th-century philosophers continued to ask the questions mentioned at  the outset of this article, the philosophy of mathematics in the 20th century was characterized by a predominant interest in formal logic, set theory (both naive set theory and axiomatic set theory), and foundational issues.
It is a profound puzzle that on the one hand mathematical truths seem to have a compelling inevitability, but on the other hand the source of their "truthfulness" remains elusive. Investigations into this issue are known as the foundations of mathematics program.
At the start of the 20th century, philosophers of mathematics were already beginning to divide into various schools of thought about all these questions, broadly distinguished by their pictures of mathematical epistemology and ontology. Three schools, formalism, intuitionism, and logicism, emerged at this time, partly in response to the increasingly widespread worry that mathematics as it stood, and analysis in particular, did not live up to the standards of certainty and rigor that had been taken for granted. Each school addressed the issues that came to the fore at that time, either attempting to resolve them or claiming that mathematics is not entitled to its status as our most trusted knowledge.
Surprising and counter-intuitive developments in formal logic and set theory early in the 20th century led to new questions concerning what was traditionally called the foundations of mathematics. As the century unfolded, the initial focus of concern expanded to an open exploration of the fundamental axioms of mathematics, the axiomatic approach having been taken for granted since the time of Euclid around 300 BCE as the natural basis for mathematics. Notions of axiom, proposition and proof, as well as the notion of a proposition being true of a mathematical object (see Assignment), were formalized, allowing them to be treated mathematically. The Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms for set theory were formulated which provided a conceptual framework in which much mathematical discourse would be interpreted. In mathematics, as in physics, new and unexpected ideas had arisen and significant changes were coming. With Gödel numbering, propositions could be interpreted as referring to themselves or other propositions, enabling inquiry into the consistency of mathematical theories. This reflective critique in which the theory under review "becomes itself the object of a mathematical study" led Hilbert to call such study metamathematics or proof theory.[29]
At the middle of the century, a new mathematical theory was created by Samuel Eilenberg and Saunders Mac Lane, known as category theory, and it became a new contender for the natural language of mathematical thinking.[30] As the 20th century progressed, however, philosophical opinions diverged as to just how well-founded were the questions about foundations that were raised at the century's beginning. Hilary Putnam summed up one common view of the situation in the last third of the century by saying:


When philosophy discovers something wrong with science, sometimes science has to be changed—Russell's paradox comes to mind, as does Berkeley's attack on the actual infinitesimal—but more often it is philosophy that has to be changed. I do not think that the difficulties that philosophy finds with classical mathematics today are genuine difficulties; and I think that the philosophical interpretations of mathematics that we are being offered on every hand are wrong, and that "philosophical interpretation" is just what mathematics doesn't need.[31]: 169–170 


Philosophy of mathematics today proceeds along several different lines of inquiry, by philosophers of mathematics, logicians, and mathematicians, and there are many schools of thought on the subject. The schools are addressed separately in the next section, and their assumptions explained.

Contemporary schools of thought[edit]
Artistic[edit]
The view that claims that mathematics is the aesthetic combination of assumptions, and then also claims that mathematics is an art. A famous mathematician who claims that is the British G. H. Hardy.[32] For Hardy, in his book, A Mathematician's Apology, the definition of mathematics was more like the aesthetic combination of concepts.[33]

Platonism[edit]
Main article: Platonism
See also: Modern Platonism
Mathematical Platonism is the form of realism that suggests that mathematical entities are abstract, have no spatiotemporal or causal properties, and are eternal and unchanging. This is often claimed to be the view most people have of numbers. The term Platonism is used because such a view is seen to parallel Plato's Theory of Forms and a "World of Ideas" (Greek: eidos (εἶδος)) described in Plato's allegory of the cave: the everyday world can only imperfectly approximate an unchanging, ultimate reality. Both Plato's cave and Platonism have meaningful, not just superficial connections, because Plato's ideas were preceded and probably influenced by the hugely popular Pythagoreans of ancient Greece, who believed that the world was, quite literally, generated by numbers.
A major question considered in mathematical Platonism is: Precisely where and how do the mathematical entities exist, and how do we know about them? Is there a world, completely separate from our physical one, that is occupied by the mathematical entities? How can we gain access to this separate world and discover truths about the entities? One proposed answer is the Ultimate Ensemble, a theory that postulates that all structures that exist mathematically also exist physically in their own universe.

Kurt Gödel
Kurt Gödel's Platonism[34] postulates a special kind of mathematical intuition that lets us perceive mathematical objects directly. (This view bears resemblances to many things Husserl said about mathematics, and supports Kant's idea that mathematics is synthetic a priori.) Davis and Hersh have suggested in their 1999 book The Mathematical Experience that most mathematicians act as though they are Platonists, even though, if pressed to defend the position carefully, they may retreat to formalism.
Full-blooded Platonism is a modern variation of Platonism, which is in reaction to the fact that different sets of mathematical entities can be proven to exist depending on the axioms and inference rules employed (for instance, the law of the excluded middle, and the axiom of choice). It holds that all mathematical entities exist. They may be provable, even if they cannot all be derived from a single consistent set of axioms.[35]
Set-theoretic realism (also set-theoretic Platonism)[36] a position defended by Penelope Maddy, is the view that set theory is about a single universe of sets.[37] This position (which is also known as naturalized Platonism because it is a naturalized version of mathematical Platonism) has been criticized by Mark Balaguer on the basis of Paul Benacerraf's epistemological problem.[38]  A similar view, termed Platonized naturalism, was later defended by the Stanford–Edmonton School: according to this view, a more traditional kind of Platonism is consistent with naturalism; the more traditional kind of Platonism they defend is distinguished by general principles that assert the existence of abstract objects.[39]

Mathematicism[edit]
Main article: Mathematicism
Max Tegmark's mathematical universe hypothesis (or mathematicism) goes further than Platonism in asserting that not only do all mathematical objects exist, but nothing else does. Tegmark's sole postulate is: All structures that exist mathematically also exist physically. That is, in the sense that "in those [worlds] complex enough to contain self-aware substructures [they] will subjectively perceive themselves as existing in a physically 'real' world".[40][41]

Logicism[edit]
Main article: Logicism
Logicism is the thesis that mathematics is reducible to logic, and hence nothing but a part of logic.[42]: 41  Logicists hold that mathematics can be known a priori, but suggest that our knowledge of mathematics is just part of our knowledge of logic in general, and is thus analytic, not requiring any special faculty of mathematical intuition. In this view, logic is the proper foundation of mathematics, and all mathematical statements are necessary logical truths.
Rudolf Carnap (1931) presents the logicist thesis in two parts:[42]

The concepts of mathematics can be derived from logical concepts through explicit definitions.
The theorems of mathematics can be derived from logical axioms through purely logical deduction.
Gottlob Frege was the founder of logicism. In his seminal Die Grundgesetze der Arithmetik (Basic Laws of Arithmetic) he built up arithmetic from a system of logic with a general principle of comprehension, which he called "Basic Law V" (for concepts F and G, the extension of F equals the extension of G if and only if for all objects a, Fa equals Ga), a principle that he took to be acceptable as part of logic.

Bertrand Russell
Frege's construction was flawed. Bertrand Russell discovered that Basic Law V is inconsistent (this is Russell's paradox). Frege abandoned his logicist program soon after this, but it was continued by Russell and Whitehead. They attributed the paradox to "vicious circularity" and built up what they called ramified type theory to deal with it. In this system, they were eventually able to build up much of modern mathematics but in an altered, and excessively complex form (for example, there were different natural numbers in each type, and there were infinitely many types). They also had to make several compromises in order to develop much of mathematics, such as the "axiom of reducibility". Even Russell said that this axiom did not really belong to logic.
Modern logicists (like Bob Hale, Crispin Wright, and perhaps others) have returned to a program closer to Frege's. They have abandoned Basic Law V in favor of abstraction principles such as Hume's principle (the number of objects falling under the concept F equals the number of objects falling under the concept G if and only if the extension of F and the extension of G can be put into one-to-one correspondence). Frege required Basic Law V to be able to give an explicit definition of the numbers, but all the properties of numbers can be derived from Hume's principle. This would not have been enough for Frege because (to paraphrase him) it does not exclude the possibility that the number 3 is in fact Julius Caesar. In addition, many of the weakened principles that they have had to adopt to replace Basic Law V no longer seem so obviously analytic, and thus purely logical.

Formalism[edit]
Main article: Formalism (philosophy of mathematics)
Formalism holds that mathematical statements may be thought of as statements about the consequences of certain string manipulation rules. For example, in the "game" of Euclidean geometry (which is seen as consisting of some strings called "axioms", and some "rules of inference" to generate new strings from given ones), one can prove that the Pythagorean theorem holds (that is, one can generate the string corresponding to the Pythagorean theorem). According to formalism, mathematical truths are not about numbers and sets and triangles and the like—in fact, they are not "about" anything at all.
Another version of formalism is known as deductivism.[43] In deductivism, the Pythagorean theorem is not an absolute truth, but a relative one, if it follows deductively from the appropriate axioms. The same is held to be true for all other mathematical statements. 
Formalism need not mean that mathematics is nothing more than a meaningless symbolic game. It is usually hoped that there exists some interpretation in which the rules of the game hold. (Compare this position to structuralism.) But it does allow the working mathematician to continue in his or her work and leave such problems to the philosopher or scientist. Many formalists would say that in practice, the axiom systems to be studied will be suggested by the demands of science or other areas of mathematics.

David Hilbert
A major early proponent of formalism was David Hilbert, whose program was intended to be a complete and consistent axiomatization of all of mathematics.[44] Hilbert aimed to show the consistency of mathematical systems from the assumption that the "finitary arithmetic" (a subsystem of the usual arithmetic of the positive integers, chosen to be philosophically uncontroversial) was consistent. Hilbert's goals of creating a system of mathematics that is both complete and consistent were seriously undermined by the second of Gödel's incompleteness theorems, which states that sufficiently expressive consistent axiom systems can never prove their own consistency. Since any such axiom system would contain the finitary arithmetic as a subsystem, Gödel's theorem implied that it would be impossible to prove the system's consistency relative to that (since it would then prove its own consistency, which Gödel had shown was impossible). Thus, in order to show that any axiomatic system of mathematics is in fact consistent, one needs to first assume the consistency of a system of mathematics that is in a sense stronger than the system to be proven consistent.
Hilbert was initially a deductivist, but, as may be clear from above, he considered certain metamathematical methods to yield intrinsically meaningful results and was a realist with respect to the finitary arithmetic. Later, he held the opinion that there was no other meaningful mathematics whatsoever, regardless of interpretation.
Other formalists, such as Rudolf Carnap, Alfred Tarski, and Haskell Curry, considered mathematics to be the investigation of formal axiom systems. Mathematical logicians study formal systems but are just as often realists as they are formalists.
Formalists are relatively tolerant and inviting to new approaches to logic, non-standard number systems, new set theories etc. The more games we study, the better. However, in all three of these examples, motivation is drawn from existing mathematical or philosophical concerns. The "games" are usually not arbitrary.
The main critique of formalism is that the actual mathematical ideas that occupy mathematicians are far removed from the string manipulation games mentioned above. Formalism is thus silent on the question of which axiom systems ought to be studied, as none is more meaningful than another from a formalistic point of view.
Recently, some[who?] formalist mathematicians have proposed that all of our formal mathematical knowledge should be systematically encoded in computer-readable formats, so as to facilitate automated proof checking of mathematical proofs and the use of interactive theorem proving in the development of mathematical theories and computer software. Because of their close connection with computer science, this idea is also advocated by mathematical intuitionists and constructivists in the "computability" tradition—see QED project for a general overview.

Conventionalism[edit]
Main articles: Conventionalism and Preintuitionism
The French mathematician Henri Poincaré was among the first to articulate a conventionalist view. Poincaré's use of non-Euclidean geometries in his work on differential equations convinced him that Euclidean geometry should not be regarded as a priori truth. He held that axioms in geometry should be chosen for the results they produce, not for their apparent coherence with human intuitions about the physical world.

Intuitionism[edit]
Main article: Mathematical intuitionism
In mathematics, intuitionism is a program of methodological reform whose motto is that "there are no non-experienced mathematical truths" (L. E. J. Brouwer). From this springboard, intuitionists seek to reconstruct what they consider to be the corrigible portion of mathematics in accordance with Kantian concepts of being, becoming, intuition, and knowledge. Brouwer, the founder of the movement, held that mathematical objects arise from the a priori forms of the volitions that inform the perception of empirical objects.[45]
A major force behind intuitionism was L. E. J. Brouwer, who rejected the usefulness of formalized logic of any sort for mathematics. His student Arend Heyting postulated an intuitionistic logic, different from the classical Aristotelian logic; this logic does not contain the law of the excluded middle and therefore frowns upon proofs by contradiction. The axiom of choice is also rejected in most intuitionistic set theories, though in some versions it is accepted.
In intuitionism, the term "explicit construction" is not cleanly defined, and that has led to criticisms. Attempts have been made to use the concepts of Turing machine or computable function to fill this gap, leading to the claim that only questions regarding the behavior of finite algorithms are meaningful and should be investigated in mathematics. This has led to the study of the computable numbers, first introduced by Alan Turing. Not surprisingly, then, this approach to mathematics is sometimes associated with theoretical computer science.

Constructivism[edit]
Main article: Constructivism (philosophy of mathematics)
Like intuitionism, constructivism involves the regulative principle that only mathematical entities which can be explicitly constructed in a certain sense should be admitted to mathematical discourse. In this view, mathematics is an exercise of the human intuition, not a game played with meaningless symbols. Instead, it is about entities that we can create directly through mental activity. In addition, some adherents of these schools reject non-constructive proofs, such as using proof by contradiction when showing the existence of an object or when trying to establish the truth of some proposition. Important work was done by Errett Bishop, who managed to prove versions of the most important theorems in real analysis as constructive analysis in his 1967 Foundations of Constructive Analysis.[46]

Finitism[edit]
Main article: Finitism
Leopold Kronecker
Finitism is an extreme form of constructivism, according to which a mathematical object does not exist unless it can be constructed from natural numbers in a finite number of steps. In her book Philosophy of Set Theory, Mary Tiles characterized those who allow countably infinite objects as classical finitists, and those who deny even countably infinite objects as strict finitists.
The most famous proponent of finitism was Leopold Kronecker,[47] who said:

God created the natural numbers, all else is the work of man.
Ultrafinitism is an even more extreme version of finitism, which rejects not only infinities but finite quantities that cannot feasibly be constructed with available resources. Another variant of finitism is Euclidean arithmetic, a system developed by John Penn Mayberry in his book The Foundations of Mathematics in the Theory of Sets.[48] Mayberry's system is Aristotelian in general inspiration and, despite his strong rejection of any role for operationalism or feasibility in the foundations of mathematics, comes to somewhat similar conclusions, such as, for instance, that super-exponentiation is not a legitimate finitary function.

Structuralism[edit]
Main article: Mathematical structuralism
Structuralism is a position holding that mathematical theories describe structures, and that mathematical objects are exhaustively defined by their places in such structures, consequently having no intrinsic properties. For instance, it would maintain that all that needs to be known about the number 1 is that it is the first whole number after 0. Likewise all the other whole numbers are defined by their places in a structure, the number line. Other examples of mathematical objects might include lines and planes in geometry, or elements and operations in abstract algebra.
Structuralism is an epistemologically realistic view in that it holds that mathematical statements have an objective truth value. However, its central claim only relates to what kind of entity a mathematical object is, not to what kind of existence mathematical objects or structures have (not, in other words, to their ontology). The kind of existence mathematical objects have would clearly be dependent on that of the structures in which they are embedded; different sub-varieties of structuralism make different ontological claims in this regard.[49]
The ante rem structuralism ("before the thing") has a similar ontology to Platonism.  Structures are held to have a real but abstract and immaterial existence. As such, it faces the standard epistemological problem of explaining the interaction between such abstract structures and flesh-and-blood mathematicians (see Benacerraf's identification problem).
The in re structuralism ("in the thing") is the equivalent of Aristotelian realism. Structures are held to exist inasmuch as some concrete system exemplifies them. This incurs the usual issues that some perfectly legitimate structures might accidentally happen not to exist, and that a finite physical world might not be "big" enough to accommodate some otherwise legitimate structures.
The post rem structuralism ("after the thing") is anti-realist about structures in a way that parallels nominalism. Like nominalism, the post rem approach denies the existence of abstract mathematical objects with properties other than their place in a relational structure.  According to this view mathematical systems exist, and have structural features in common. If something is true of a structure, it will be true of all systems exemplifying the structure. However, it is merely instrumental to talk of structures being "held in common" between systems: they in fact have no independent existence.

Embodied mind theories[edit]
Embodied mind theories hold that mathematical thought is a natural outgrowth of the human cognitive apparatus which finds itself in our physical universe. For example, the abstract concept of number springs from the experience of counting discrete objects (requiring the human senses such as sight for detecting the objects, touch; and signalling from the brain). It is held that mathematics is not universal and does not exist in any real sense, other than in human brains. Humans construct, but do not discover, mathematics.
The cognitive processes of pattern-finding and distinguishing objects are also subject to neuroscience; if mathematics is considered to be relevant to a natural world (such as from realism or a degree of it, as opposed to pure solipsism).
Its actual relevance to reality, while accepted to be a trustworthy approximation (it is also suggested the evolution of perceptions, the body, and the senses may have been necessary for survival) is not necessarily accurate to a full realism (and is still subject to flaws such as illusion, assumptions (consequently; the foundations and axioms in which mathematics have been formed by humans), generalisations, deception, and hallucinations). As such, this may also raise questions for the modern scientific method for its compatibility with general mathematics; as while relatively reliable, it is still limited by what can be measured by empiricism which may not be as reliable as previously assumed (see also: 'counterintuitive' concepts in such as quantum nonlocality, and action at a distance).
Another issue is that one numeral system may not necessarily be applicable to problem solving. Subjects such as complex numbers or imaginary numbers require specific changes to more commonly used axioms of mathematics; otherwise they cannot be adequately understood.
Alternatively, computer programmers may use hexadecimal for its 'human-friendly' representation of binary-coded values, rather than decimal (convenient for counting because humans have ten fingers). The axioms or logical rules behind mathematics also vary through time (such as the adaption and invention of zero).
As perceptions from the human brain are subject to illusions, assumptions, deceptions, (induced) hallucinations, cognitive errors or assumptions in a general context, it can be questioned whether they are accurate or strictly indicative of truth (see also: philosophy of being), and the nature of empiricism itself in relation to the universe and whether it is independent to the senses and the universe. 
The human mind has no special claim on reality or approaches to it built out of math. If such constructs as Euler's identity are true then they are true as a map of the human mind and cognition.
Embodied mind theorists thus explain the effectiveness of mathematics—mathematics was constructed by the brain in order to be effective in this universe.
The most accessible, famous, and infamous treatment of this perspective is Where Mathematics Comes From, by George Lakoff and Rafael E. Núñez. In addition, mathematician Keith Devlin has investigated similar concepts with his book The Math Instinct, as has neuroscientist Stanislas Dehaene with his book The Number Sense. For more on the philosophical ideas that inspired this perspective, see cognitive science of mathematics.

Aristotelian realism[edit]
Main article: Aristotelian realist philosophy of mathematics
See also: In re structuralism and Immanent realism
Aristotelian realism holds that mathematics studies properties such as symmetry, continuity and order that can be literally realized in the physical world (or in any other world there might be). It contrasts with Platonism in holding that the objects of mathematics, such as numbers, do not exist in an "abstract" world but can be physically realized. For example, the number 4 is realized in the relation between a heap of parrots and the universal "being a parrot" that divides the heap into so many parrots.[50][51] Aristotelian realism is defended by James Franklin and the Sydney School in the philosophy of mathematics and is close to the view of Penelope Maddy that when an egg carton is opened, a set of three eggs is perceived (that is, a mathematical entity realized in the physical world).[52] A problem for Aristotelian realism is what account to give of higher infinities, which may not be realizable in the physical world.
The Euclidean arithmetic developed by John Penn Mayberry in his book The Foundations of Mathematics in the Theory of Sets[48] also falls into the Aristotelian realist tradition. Mayberry, following Euclid, considers numbers to be simply "definite multitudes of units" realized in nature—such as "the members of the London Symphony Orchestra" or "the trees in Birnam wood". Whether or not there are definite multitudes of units for which Euclid's Common Notion 5 (the whole is greater than the part) fails and which would consequently be reckoned as infinite is for Mayberry essentially a question about Nature and does not entail any transcendental suppositions.

Psychologism[edit]
Main article: Psychologism
See also: Anti-psychologism
Psychologism in the philosophy of mathematics is the position that mathematical concepts and/or truths are grounded in, derived from or explained by psychological facts (or laws).
John Stuart Mill seems to have been an advocate of a type of logical psychologism, as were many 19th-century German logicians such as Sigwart and Erdmann as well as a number of psychologists, past and present: for example, Gustave Le Bon. Psychologism was famously criticized by Frege in his The Foundations of Arithmetic, and many of his works and essays, including his review of Husserl's Philosophy of Arithmetic. Edmund Husserl, in the first volume of his Logical Investigations, called "The Prolegomena of Pure Logic", criticized psychologism thoroughly and sought to distance himself from it. The "Prolegomena" is considered a more concise, fair, and thorough refutation of psychologism than the criticisms made by Frege, and also it is considered today by many as being a memorable refutation for its decisive blow to psychologism. Psychologism was also criticized by Charles Sanders Peirce and Maurice Merleau-Ponty.

Empiricism[edit]
Main articles: Quasi-empiricism in mathematics and Postmodern mathematics
Mathematical empiricism is a form of realism that denies that mathematics can be known a priori at all. It says that we discover mathematical facts by empirical research, just like facts in any of the other sciences. It is not one of the classical three positions advocated in the early 20th century, but primarily arose in the middle of the century. However, an important early proponent of a view like this was John Stuart Mill. Mill's view was widely criticized, because, according to critics, such as A.J. Ayer,[53] it makes statements like "2 + 2 = 4" come out as uncertain, contingent truths, which we can only learn by observing instances of two pairs coming together and forming a quartet.
Karl Popper was another philosopher to point out empirical aspects of mathematics, observing that "most mathematical theories are, like those of physics and biology, hypothetico-deductive: pure mathematics therefore turns out to be much closer to the natural sciences whose hypotheses are conjectures, than it seemed even recently."[54] Popper also noted he would "admit a system as empirical or scientific only if it is capable of being tested by experience."[55]
Contemporary mathematical empiricism, formulated by W. V. O. Quine and Hilary Putnam, is primarily supported by the indispensability argument: mathematics is indispensable to all empirical sciences, and if we want to believe in the reality of the phenomena described by the sciences, we ought also believe in the reality of those entities required for this description. That is, since physics needs to talk about electrons to say why light bulbs behave as they do, then electrons must exist. Since physics needs to talk about numbers in offering any of its explanations, then numbers must exist. In keeping with Quine and Putnam's overall philosophies, this is a naturalistic argument. It argues for the existence of mathematical entities as the best explanation for experience, thus stripping mathematics of being distinct from the other sciences.
Putnam strongly rejected the term "Platonist" as implying an over-specific ontology that was not necessary to mathematical practice in any real sense. He advocated a form of "pure realism" that rejected mystical notions of truth and accepted much quasi-empiricism in mathematics. This grew from the increasingly popular assertion in the late 20th century that no one foundation of mathematics could be ever proven to exist. It is also sometimes called "postmodernism in mathematics" although that term is considered overloaded by some and insulting by others. Quasi-empiricism argues that in doing their research, mathematicians test hypotheses as well as prove theorems. A mathematical argument can transmit falsity from the conclusion to the premises just as well as it can transmit truth from the premises to the conclusion. Putnam has argued that any theory of mathematical realism would include quasi-empirical methods. He proposed that an alien species doing mathematics might well rely on quasi-empirical methods primarily, being willing often to forgo rigorous and axiomatic proofs, and still be doing mathematics—at perhaps a somewhat greater risk of failure of their calculations. He gave a detailed argument for this in New Directions.[56] Quasi-empiricism was also developed by Imre Lakatos.
The most important criticism of empirical views of mathematics is approximately the same as that raised against Mill. If mathematics is just as empirical as the other sciences, then this suggests that its results are just as fallible as theirs, and just as contingent. In Mill's case the empirical justification comes directly, while in Quine's case it comes indirectly, through the coherence of our scientific theory as a whole, i.e. consilience after E.O. Wilson. Quine suggests that mathematics seems completely certain because the role it plays in our web of belief is extraordinarily central, and that it would be extremely difficult for us to revise it, though not impossible.
For a philosophy of mathematics that attempts to overcome some of the shortcomings of Quine and Gödel's approaches by taking aspects of each see Penelope Maddy's Realism in Mathematics. Another example of a realist theory is the embodied mind theory.
For experimental evidence suggesting that human infants can do elementary arithmetic, see Brian Butterworth.

Fictionalism[edit]
See also: Fictionalism
Mathematical fictionalism was brought to fame in 1980 when Hartry Field published Science Without Numbers,[57] which rejected and in fact reversed Quine's indispensability argument. Where Quine suggested that mathematics was indispensable for our best scientific theories, and therefore should be accepted as a body of truths talking about independently existing entities, Field suggested that mathematics was dispensable, and therefore should be considered as a body of falsehoods not talking about anything real. He did this by giving a complete axiomatization of Newtonian mechanics with no reference to numbers or functions at all. He started with the "betweenness" of Hilbert's axioms to characterize space without coordinatizing it, and then added extra relations between points to do the work formerly done by vector fields. Hilbert's geometry is mathematical, because it talks about abstract points, but in Field's theory, these points are the concrete points of physical space, so no special mathematical objects at all are needed.
Having shown how to do science without using numbers, Field proceeded to rehabilitate mathematics as a kind of useful fiction. He showed that mathematical physics is a conservative extension of his non-mathematical physics (that is, every physical fact provable in mathematical physics is already provable from Field's system), so that mathematics is a reliable process whose physical applications are all true, even though its own statements are false. Thus, when doing mathematics, we can see ourselves as telling a sort of story, talking as if numbers existed. For Field, a statement like "2 + 2 = 4" is just as fictitious as "Sherlock Holmes lived at 221B Baker Street"—but both are true according to the relevant fictions.
Another fictionalist, Mary Leng, expresses the perspective succinctly by dismissing any seeming connection between mathematics and the physical world as "a happy coincidence". This rejection separates fictionalism from other forms of anti-realism, which see mathematics itself as artificial but still bounded or fitted to reality in some way.[58]
By this account, there are no metaphysical or epistemological problems special to mathematics. The only worries left are the general worries about non-mathematical physics, and about fiction in general. Field's approach has been very influential, but is widely rejected. This is in part because of the requirement of strong fragments of second-order logic to carry out his reduction, and because the statement of conservativity seems to require quantification over abstract models or deductions.[citation needed]

Social constructivism[edit]
Main article: Social constructivism
Social constructivism sees mathematics primarily as a social construct, as a product of culture, subject to correction and change. Like the other sciences, mathematics is viewed as an empirical endeavor whose results are constantly evaluated and may be discarded. However, while on an empiricist view the evaluation is some sort of comparison with "reality", social constructivists emphasize that the direction of mathematical research is dictated by the fashions of the social group performing it or by the needs of the society financing it. However, although such external forces may change the direction of some mathematical research, there are strong internal constraints—the mathematical traditions, methods, problems, meanings and values into which mathematicians are enculturated—that work to conserve the historically-defined discipline.
This runs counter to the traditional beliefs of working mathematicians, that mathematics is somehow pure or objective. But social constructivists argue that mathematics is in fact grounded by much uncertainty: as mathematical practice evolves, the status of previous mathematics is cast into doubt, and is corrected to the degree it is required or desired by the current mathematical community. This can be seen in the development of analysis from reexamination of the calculus of Leibniz and Newton. They argue further that finished mathematics is often accorded too much status, and folk mathematics not enough, due to an overemphasis on axiomatic proof and peer review as practices.
The social nature of mathematics is highlighted in its subcultures. Major discoveries can be made in one branch of mathematics and be relevant to another, yet the relationship goes undiscovered for lack of social contact between mathematicians. Social constructivists argue each speciality forms its own epistemic community and often has great difficulty communicating, or motivating the investigation of unifying conjectures that might relate different areas of mathematics. Social constructivists see the process of "doing mathematics" as actually creating the meaning, while social realists see a deficiency either of human capacity to abstractify, or of human's cognitive bias, or of mathematicians' collective intelligence as preventing the comprehension of a real universe of mathematical objects. Social constructivists sometimes reject the search for foundations of mathematics as bound to fail, as pointless or even meaningless.
Contributions to this school have been made by Imre Lakatos and Thomas Tymoczko, although it is not clear that either would endorse the title.[clarification needed] More recently Paul Ernest has explicitly formulated a social constructivist philosophy of mathematics.[59] Some consider the work of Paul Erdős as a whole to have advanced this view (although he personally rejected it) because of his uniquely broad collaborations, which prompted others to see and study "mathematics as a social activity", e.g., via the Erdős number. Reuben Hersh has also promoted the social view of mathematics, calling it a "humanistic" approach,[60] similar to but not quite the same as that associated with Alvin White;[61] one of Hersh's co-authors, Philip J. Davis, has expressed sympathy for the social view as well.

Beyond the traditional schools[edit]
Unreasonable effectiveness[edit]
Rather than focus on narrow debates about the true nature of mathematical truth, or even on practices unique to mathematicians such as the proof, a growing movement from the 1960s to the 1990s began to question the idea of seeking foundations or finding any one right answer to why mathematics works. The starting point for this was Eugene Wigner's famous 1960 paper "The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences", in which he argued that the happy coincidence of mathematics and physics being so well matched seemed to be unreasonable and hard to explain.

Popper's two senses of number statements[edit]
Realist and constructivist theories are normally taken to be contraries. However, Karl Popper[62] argued that a number statement such as "2 apples + 2 apples = 4 apples" can be taken in two senses. In one sense it is irrefutable and logically true. In the second sense it is factually true and falsifiable. Another way of putting this is to say that a single number statement can express two propositions: one of which can be explained on constructivist lines; the other on realist lines.[63]

Philosophy of language[edit]
This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (February 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Innovations in the philosophy of language during the 20th century renewed interest in whether mathematics is, as is often said,[citation needed] the language of science. Although some[who?] mathematicians and philosophers would accept the statement "mathematics is a language" (most consider that the language of mathematics is a part of mathematics to which mathematics cannot be reduced),[citation needed] linguists[who?] believe that the implications of such a statement must be considered. For example, the tools of linguistics are not generally applied to the symbol systems of mathematics, that is, mathematics is studied in a markedly different way from other languages. If mathematics is a language, it is a different type of language from natural languages. Indeed, because of the need for clarity and specificity, the language of mathematics is far more constrained than natural languages studied by linguists. However, the methods developed by Frege and Tarski for the study of mathematical language have been extended greatly by Tarski's student Richard Montague and other linguists working in formal semantics to show that the distinction between mathematical language and natural language may not be as great as it seems.
Mohan Ganesalingam has analysed mathematical language using tools from formal linguistics.[64] Ganesalingam notes that some features of natural language are not necessary when analysing mathematical language (such as tense), but many of the same analytical tools can be used (such as context-free grammars). One important difference is that mathematical objects have clearly defined types, which can be explicitly defined in a text: "Effectively, we are allowed to introduce a word in one part of a sentence, and declare its part of speech in another; and this operation has no analogue in natural language."[64]: 251 

Arguments[edit]
Indispensability argument for realism[edit]
Main article: Quine–Putnam indispensability argument
This argument, associated with Willard Quine and Hilary Putnam, is considered by Stephen Yablo to be one of the most challenging arguments in favor of the acceptance of the existence of abstract mathematical entities, such as numbers and sets.[65] The form of the argument is as follows.

One must have ontological commitments to all entities that are indispensable to the best scientific theories, and to those entities only (commonly referred to as "all and only").
Mathematical entities are indispensable to the best scientific theories. Therefore,
One must have ontological commitments to mathematical entities.[66]
The justification for the first premise is the most controversial. Both Putnam and Quine invoke naturalism to justify the exclusion of all non-scientific entities, and hence to defend the "only" part of "all and only". The assertion that "all" entities postulated in scientific theories, including numbers, should be accepted as real is justified by confirmation holism. Since theories are not confirmed in a piecemeal fashion, but as a whole, there is no justification for excluding any of the entities referred to in well-confirmed theories. This puts the nominalist who wishes to exclude the existence of sets and non-Euclidean geometry, but to include the existence of quarks and other undetectable entities of physics, for example, in a difficult position.[66]

Epistemic argument against realism[edit]
The anti-realist "epistemic argument" against Platonism has been made by Paul Benacerraf and Hartry Field. Platonism posits that mathematical objects are abstract entities. By general agreement, abstract entities cannot interact causally with concrete, physical entities ("the truth-values of our mathematical assertions depend on facts involving Platonic entities that reside in a realm outside of space-time"[67]). Whilst our knowledge of concrete, physical objects is based on our ability to perceive them, and therefore to causally interact with them, there is no parallel account of how mathematicians come to have knowledge of abstract objects.[68][69][70] Another way of making the point is that if the Platonic world were to disappear, it would make no difference to the ability of mathematicians to generate proofs, etc., which is already fully accountable in terms of physical processes in their brains.
Field developed his views into fictionalism. Benacerraf also developed the philosophy of mathematical structuralism, according to which there are no mathematical objects. Nonetheless, some versions of structuralism are compatible with some versions of realism.
The argument hinges on the idea that a satisfactory naturalistic account of thought processes in terms of brain processes can be given for mathematical reasoning along with everything else. One line of defense is to maintain that this is false, so that mathematical reasoning uses some special intuition that involves contact with the Platonic realm. A modern form of this argument is given by Sir Roger Penrose.[71]
Another line of defense is to maintain that abstract objects are relevant to mathematical reasoning in a way that is non-causal, and not analogous to perception. This argument is developed by Jerrold Katz in his 2000 book Realistic Rationalism.
A more radical defense is denial of physical reality, i.e. the mathematical universe hypothesis. In that case, a mathematician's knowledge of mathematics is one mathematical object making contact with another.

Aesthetics[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Many practicing mathematicians have been drawn to their subject because of a sense of beauty they perceive in it. One sometimes hears the sentiment that mathematicians would like to leave philosophy to the philosophers and get back to mathematics—where, presumably, the beauty lies.
In his work on the divine proportion, H.E. Huntley relates the feeling of reading and understanding someone else's proof of a theorem of mathematics to that of a viewer of a masterpiece of art—the reader of a proof has a similar sense of exhilaration at understanding as the original author of the proof, much as, he argues, the viewer of a masterpiece has a sense of exhilaration similar to the original painter or sculptor. Indeed, one can study mathematical and scientific writings as literature.
Philip J. Davis and Reuben Hersh have commented that the sense of mathematical beauty is universal amongst practicing mathematicians. By way of example, they provide two proofs of the irrationality of √2. The first is the traditional proof by contradiction, ascribed to Euclid; the second is a more direct proof involving the fundamental theorem of arithmetic that, they argue, gets to the heart of the issue. Davis and Hersh argue that mathematicians find the second proof more aesthetically appealing because it gets closer to the nature of the problem.
Paul Erdős was well known for his notion of a hypothetical "Book" containing the most elegant or beautiful mathematical proofs. There is not universal agreement that a result has one "most elegant" proof; Gregory Chaitin has argued against this idea.
Philosophers have sometimes criticized mathematicians' sense of beauty or elegance as being, at best, vaguely stated. By the same token, however, philosophers of mathematics have sought to characterize what makes one proof more desirable than another when both are logically sound.
Another aspect of aesthetics concerning mathematics is mathematicians' views towards the possible uses of mathematics for purposes deemed unethical or inappropriate. The best-known exposition of this view occurs in G. H. Hardy's book A Mathematician's Apology, in which Hardy argues that pure mathematics is superior in beauty to applied mathematics precisely because it cannot be used for war and similar ends.

Journals[edit]
Philosophia Mathematica journal
The Philosophy of Mathematics Education Journal homepage
See also[edit]

Mathematics portalPhilosophy portal

Definitions of mathematics
Formal language
Foundations of mathematics
Golden ratio
Model theory
Non-standard analysis
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of logic
Philosophy of science
Philosophy of physics
Philosophy of probability
Rule of inference
Science studies
Scientific method

Related works[edit]

The Analyst
Euclid's Elements
"On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems"
"On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem"
Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy
"New Foundations for Mathematical Logic"
Principia Mathematica
The Simplest Mathematics

Historical topics[edit]
History and philosophy of science
History of mathematics
History of philosophy
Notes[edit]


^ This does not mean to make explicit all inference rules that are used. On the contrary, this is generally impossible, without computers and proof assistants. Even with this modern technology, it may take years of human work for writing down a completely detailed proof.

^ This does not mean that empirical evidence and intuition are not needed for choosing the theorems to be proved and to prove them.

^ Even if some people could consider that more accurates definitions were needed, they were unable to provide them.


References[edit]


^ Balaguer, Mark (2016). "Platonism in Metaphysics". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2016 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Archived from the original on January 30, 2022. Retrieved April 2, 2022.

^ a b Borel, Armand (1983). "Mathematics: Art and Science". The Mathematical Intelligencer. 5 (4). Springer: 9–17. doi:10.4171/news/103/8. ISSN 1027-488X.

^ See White, L. (1947). "The locus of mathematical reality: An anthropological footnote". Philosophy of Science. 14 (4): 289–303. doi:10.1086/286957. S2CID 119887253. 189303; also in Newman, J. R. (1956). The World of Mathematics. Vol. 4. New York: Simon and Schuster. pp. 2348–2364.

^ Hamami, Yacin (June 2022). "Mathematical Rigor and Proof" (PDF). The Review of Symbolic Logic. 15 (2): 409–449. doi:10.1017/S1755020319000443. S2CID 209980693. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 5, 2022. Retrieved November 21, 2022.

^ Ferreirós, José (2001). "The Road to Modern Logic—An Interpretation" (PDF). Bulletin of Symbolic Logic. 7 (4): 441–484. doi:10.2307/2687794. hdl:11441/38373. JSTOR 2687794. S2CID 43258676. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 2, 2023. Retrieved November 11, 2022.

^ Perminov, V. Ya. (1988). "On the Reliability of Mathematical Proofs". Philosophy of Mathematics. 42 (167 (4)). Revue Internationale de Philosophie: 500–508.

^ Davis, Jon D.; McDuffie, Amy Roth; Drake, Corey; Seiwell, Amanda L. (2019). "Teachers' perceptions of the official curriculum: Problem solving and rigor". International Journal of Educational Research. 93: 91–100. doi:10.1016/j.ijer.2018.10.002. S2CID 149753721.

^ Bellomo, Nicola; Preziosi, Luigi (December 22, 1994). Modelling Mathematical Methods and Scientific Computation. Mathematical Modeling. Vol. 1. CRC Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-8493-8331-1. Retrieved November 16, 2022.

^ Hennig, Christian (2010). "Mathematical Models and Reality: A Constructivist Perspective". Foundations of Science. 15: 29–48. doi:10.1007/s10699-009-9167-x. S2CID 6229200. Retrieved November 17, 2022.

^ Frigg, Roman; Hartmann, Stephan (February 4, 2020). "Models in Science". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on November 17, 2022. Retrieved November 17, 2022.

^ Stewart, Ian (2018). "Mathematics, Maps, and Models". In Wuppuluri, Shyam; Doria, Francisco Antonio (eds.). The Map and the Territory: Exploring the Foundations of Science, Thought and Reality. The Frontiers Collection. Springer. pp. 345–356. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-72478-2_18. ISBN 978-3-319-72478-2. Retrieved November 17, 2022.

^ "The science checklist applied: Mathematics". Understanding Science. University of California, Berkeley. Archived from the original on October 27, 2019. Retrieved October 27, 2019.

^ Mackay, A. L. (1991). Dictionary of Scientific Quotations. London: Taylor & Francis. p. 100. ISBN 978-0-7503-0106-0. Retrieved March 19, 2023.

^ Bishop, Alan (1991). "Environmental activities and mathematical culture". Mathematical Enculturation: A Cultural Perspective on Mathematics Education. Norwell, Massachusetts: Kluwer Academic Publishers. pp. 20–59. ISBN 978-0-7923-1270-3. Retrieved April 5, 2020.

^ Shasha, Dennis Elliot; Lazere, Cathy A. (1998). Out of Their Minds: The Lives and Discoveries of 15 Great Computer Scientists. Springer. p. 228. ISBN 978-0-387-98269-4.

^ Nickles, Thomas (2013). "The Problem of Demarcation". Philosophy of Pseudoscience: Reconsidering the Demarcation Problem. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. p. 104. ISBN 978-0-226-05182-6.

^ Pigliucci, Massimo (2014). "Are There 'Other' Ways of Knowing?". Philosophy Now. Archived from the original on May 13, 2020. Retrieved April 6, 2020.

^ Wigner, Eugene (1960). "The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences". Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics. 13 (1): 1–14. Bibcode:1960CPAM...13....1W. doi:10.1002/cpa.3160130102. S2CID 6112252. Archived from the original on February 28, 2011.

^ Sarukkai, Sundar (February 10, 2005). "Revisiting the 'unreasonable effectiveness' of mathematics". Current Science. 88 (3): 415–423. JSTOR 24110208.

^ Wagstaff, Samuel S. Jr. (2021). "History of Integer Factoring" (PDF). In Bos, Joppe W.; Stam, Martijn (eds.). Computational Cryptography, Algorithmic Aspects of Cryptography, A Tribute to AKL. London Mathematical Society Lecture Notes Series 469. Cambridge University Press. pp. 41–77. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 20, 2022. Retrieved November 20, 2022.

^ "Curves: Ellipse". MacTutor. School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, Scotland. Archived from the original on October 14, 2022. Retrieved November 20, 2022.

^ Mukunth, Vasudevan (September 10, 2015). "Beyond the Surface of Einstein's Relativity Lay a Chimerical Geometry". The Wire. Archived from the original on November 20, 2022. Retrieved November 20, 2022.

^ Wilson, Edwin B.; Lewis, Gilbert N. (November 1912). "The Space-Time Manifold of Relativity. The Non-Euclidean Geometry of Mechanics and Electromagnetics". Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. 48 (11): 389–507. doi:10.2307/20022840. JSTOR 20022840.

^ Hanson, Norwood Russell (November 1961). "Discovering the Positron (I)". The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science. 12 (47). The University of Chicago Press: 194–214. doi:10.1093/bjps/xiii.49.54. JSTOR 685207.

^ Ginammi, Michele (February 2016). "Avoiding reification: Heuristic effectiveness of mathematics and the prediction of the Ω– particle". Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics. 53: 20–27. Bibcode:2016SHPMP..53...20G. doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2015.12.001.

^ "Is mathematics discovered or invented?". University of Exeter. Archived from the original on 27 July 2018. Retrieved 28 March 2018.

^ "Math: Discovered, Invented, or Both?". pbs.org. 13 April 2015. Archived from the original on 28 March 2018. Retrieved 28 March 2018.

^ Morris Kline (1990), Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times, page 32. Oxford University Press.

^ Kleene, Stephen (1971). Introduction to Metamathematics. Amsterdam, Netherlands: North-Holland Publishing Company. p. 5.

^ Mac Lane, Saunders (1998), Categories for the Working Mathematician, 2nd edition, Springer-Verlag, New York, NY.

^ *Putnam, Hilary (1967), "Mathematics Without Foundations", Journal of Philosophy 64/1, 5-22. Reprinted, pp. 168–184 in W.D. Hart (ed., 1996).

^ "A Mathematician's Apology Quotes by G.H. Hardy". Archived from the original on 2021-05-08. Retrieved 2020-07-20.

^ S, F. (January 1941). "A Mathematician's Apology". Nature. 147 (3714): 3–5. Bibcode:1941Natur.147....3S. doi:10.1038/147003a0. S2CID 4212863.

^ "Platonism in Metaphysics". Platonism in Metaphysics (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2016. Archived from the original on 2019-04-28. Retrieved 2018-08-24.

^ "Platonism in the Philosophy of Mathematics". "Platonism in the Philosophy of Mathematics", (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2018. Archived from the original on 2018-11-25. Retrieved 2018-08-17.

^ Ivor Grattan-Guinness (ed.), Companion Encyclopedia of the History and Philosophy of the Mathematical Sciences, Routledge, 2002, p. 681.

^ "Naturalism in the Philosophy of Mathematics". Naturalism in the Philosophy of Mathematics (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2016. Archived from the original on 2018-06-11. Retrieved 2018-08-18.

^ Balaguer, Mark (1994). "Against (Maddian) naturalized Platonism". Philosophia Mathematica. 2 (2): 97–108. doi:10.1093/philmat/2.2.97.

^ Linsky, B.; Zalta, E. (1995). "Naturalized Platonism vs. Platonized Naturalism". The Journal of Philosophy. 92 (10): 525–555. doi:10.2307/2940786. JSTOR 2940786.

^ Tegmark, Max (February 2008). "The Mathematical Universe". Foundations of Physics. 38 (2): 101–150. arXiv:0704.0646. Bibcode:2008FoPh...38..101T. doi:10.1007/s10701-007-9186-9. S2CID 9890455.

^ Tegmark (1998), p. 1.

^ a b Carnap, Rudolf (1931), "Die logizistische Grundlegung der Mathematik", Erkenntnis 2, 91-121. Republished, "The Logicist Foundations of Mathematics", E. Putnam and G.J. Massey (trans.), in Benacerraf and Putnam (1964). Reprinted, pp. 41–52 in Benacerraf and Putnam (1983).

^ Alexander Paseau; Fabian Pregel. Deductivism in the Philosophy of Mathematics. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Zach, Richard (2019), "Hilbert's Program", in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, archived from the original on 2022-02-08, retrieved 2019-05-25

^ Audi, Robert (1999), The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1995. 2nd edition. Page 542.

^ Bishop, Errett (2012) [1967], Foundations of Constructive Analysis (Paperback ed.), New York: Ishi Press, ISBN 978-4-87187-714-5

^ From an 1886 lecture at the 'Berliner Naturforscher-Versammlung', according to H. M. Weber's memorial article, as quoted and translated in Gonzalez Cabillon, Julio (2000-02-03). "FOM: What were Kronecker's f.o.m.?". Archived from the original on 2007-10-09. Retrieved 2008-07-19.
Gonzalez gives as the sources for the memorial article, the following: Weber, H: "Leopold Kronecker", Jahresberichte der Deutschen Mathematiker Vereinigung, vol ii (1893), pp. 5-31. Cf. page 19. See also Mathematische Annalen vol. xliii (1893), pp. 1-25.

^ a b Mayberry, J.P. (2001). The Foundations of Mathematics in the Theory of Sets. Cambridge University Press.

^ Brown, James (2008). Philosophy of Mathematics. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-96047-2.

^ Franklin, James (2014). An Aristotelian Realist Philosophy of Mathematics: Mathematics as the Science of Quantity and Structure. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 9781137400727.

^ Franklin, James (2022). "Mathematics as a science of non-abstract reality: Aristotelian realist philosophies of mathematics". Foundations of Science. 27 (2): 327–344. doi:10.1007/s10699-021-09786-1. S2CID 233658181. Retrieved 30 June 2021.

^ Maddy, Penelope (1990), Realism in Mathematics, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

^ Ayer, Alfred Jules (1952). Language, Truth, & Logic. New York: Dover Publications, Inc. p. 74 ff. ISBN 978-0-486-20010-1.

^ Popper, Karl R. (1995). "On knowledge". In Search of a Better World: Lectures and Essays from Thirty Years. New York: Routledge. p. 56. Bibcode:1992sbwl.book.....P. ISBN 978-0-415-13548-1.

^ Popper, Karl (2002) [1959]. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. Abingdon-on-Thames: Routledge. p. 18. ISBN 978-0-415-27843-0.

^ Tymoczko, Thomas (1998), New Directions in the Philosophy of Mathematics. ISBN 978-0691034980.

^ Field, Hartry, Science Without Numbers, Blackwell, 1980.

^ Leng, Mary (2010). Mathematics and Reality. Oxford University Press. p. 239. ISBN 978-0199280797.

^ Ernest, Paul. "Is Mathematics Discovered or Invented?". University of Exeter. Archived from the original on 2008-04-05. Retrieved 2008-12-26.

^ Hersh, Reuben (February 10, 1997). "What Kind of a Thing is a Number?" (Interview). Interviewed by John Brockman. Edge Foundation. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008. Retrieved 2008-12-26.

^ "Humanism and Mathematics Education". Math Forum. Humanistic Mathematics Network Journal. Archived from the original on 2008-07-24. Retrieved 2008-12-26.

^ Popper, Karl Raimund (1946) Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume XX.

^ Gregory, Frank Hutson (1996) "Arithmetic and Reality: A Development of Popper's Ideas". City University of Hong Kong. Republished in Philosophy of Mathematics Education Journal No. 26 (December 2011)

^ a b Ganesalingam, Mohan (2013). The Language of Mathematics: A Linguistic and Philosophical Investigation. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 7805. Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-37012-0. ISBN 978-3-642-37011-3. S2CID 14260721.

^ Yablo, S. (November 8, 1998). "A Paradox of Existence". Archived from the original on January 7, 2020. Retrieved August 26, 2019.

^ a b Putnam, H. Mathematics, Matter and Method. Philosophical Papers, vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 2nd. ed., 1985.

^ Field, Hartry, 1989, Realism, Mathematics, and Modality, Oxford: Blackwell, p. 68

^ "Since abstract objects are outside the nexus of causes and effects, and thus perceptually inaccessible, they cannot be known through their effects on us" — Katz, J. Realistic Rationalism, 2000, p. 15

^ "Philosophy Now: "Mathematical Knowledge: A dilemma"". Archived from the original on February 7, 2011.

^ "Platonism in the Philosophy of Mathematics". Standard Encyclopaedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2018. Archived from the original on 2010-12-04. Retrieved 2011-02-13.

^ Review Archived 2011-05-14 at the Wayback Machine of The Emperor's New Mind.


Further reading[edit]
This 'further reading' section may need cleanup. Please read the editing guide and help improve the section. (August 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Aristotle, "Prior Analytics", Hugh Tredennick (trans.), pp. 181–531 in Aristotle, Volume 1, Loeb Classical Library, William Heinemann, London, UK, 1938.
Benacerraf, Paul; Putnam, Hilary, eds. (1983). Philosophy of Mathematics, Selected Readings (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107268135.
Berkeley, George (1734), The Analyst; or, a Discourse Addressed to an Infidel Mathematician. Wherein It is examined whether the Object, Principles, and Inferences of the modern Analysis are more distinctly conceived, or more evidently deduced, than Religious Mysteries and Points of Faith, London & Dublin. Online text, David R. Wilkins (ed.), Eprint.
Bourbaki, N. (2013) [1994]. Elements of the History of Mathematics. Translated by Meldrum, John. Springer. ISBN 9783642616938. OCLC 1076247011.
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan (1987). Truth and Beauty. Aesthetics and Motivations in Science. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226100876. OCLC 1023891429.
Colyvan, Mark (2004), "Indispensability Arguments in the Philosophy of Mathematics", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward N. Zalta (ed.), Eprint.
Davis, Philip J.; Hersh, Reuben (1981). The Mathematical Experience. Mariner Books.
Devlin, Keith (2005). The Math Instinct: Why You're a Mathematical Genius (Along with Lobsters, Birds, Cats, and Dogs). Thunder's Mouth Press. ISBN 9781560256724. OCLC 636363534.
Dummett, Michael (1991). Frege, Philosophy of Mathematics. Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674319356.
Dummett, Michael (1991). Frege and Other Philosophers. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780191520051.
Dummett, Michael (1993). Origins of Analytical Philosophy. Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674644724.
Ernest, Paul (1998). Social Constructivism as a Philosophy of Mathematics. State University of New York Press. ISBN 9780791435885.
George, Alexandre, ed. (1994). Mathematics and Mind. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195079296.
Hadamard, Jacques (1954). The Psychology of Invention in the Mathematical Field (2nd ed.). Dover. ISBN 9780486201078.
Hardy, G.H. (1992) [1940]. A Mathematician's Apology. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521427067.
Hart, W.D. (1996). Wilbur Dyre Hart (ed.). The Philosophy of Mathematics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198751199.
Hendricks, Vincent F.; Leitgeb, Hannes, eds. (2006). Philosophy of Mathematics: 5 Questions. Automatic Press. ISBN 9788799101351. / VIP, . キャッシング対策局【審査・在籍確認・増額・おまとめ・借り換え】
Huntley, H.E. (1970). The Divine Proportion: A Study in Mathematical Beauty. Dover. ISBN 9780486222547.
Irvine, A., ed. (2009). The Philosophy of Mathematics. Handbook of the Philosophy of Science. North-Holland Elsevier. ISBN 9780080930589.
Klein, Jacob (2013) [1968]. Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra. Translated by Brann, Eva. Dover. ISBN 9780486319810. OCLC 841505651.
Kline, Morris (2012) [1959]. Mathematics and the Physical World. Dover. ISBN 9780486136318. OCLC 868272162.
Kline, Morris (1990) [1972]. Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195061352.
König, Julius (Gyula) (1905). "Über die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre und das Kontinuumproblem". Mathematische Annalen. 61: 156–160. doi:10.1007/BF01457735. S2CID 123696953. Reprinted, "On the Foundations of Set Theory and the Continuum Problem", Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg (trans.), pp. 145–149 in Jean van Heijenoort (ed., 1967).
Körner, Stephan (1960). The Philosophy of Mathematics, An Introduction. Harper Books. OCLC 1054045322.
Lakoff, George; Núñez, Rafael E. (2000). Where Mathematics Comes From: How the Embodied Mind Brings Mathematics into Being. Basic Books. ISBN 9780465037704.
Lakatos, Imre (1976). Worrall, J.; Zahar, E. (eds.). Proofs and Refutations:The Logic of Mathematical Discovery. Cambridge University Press.
Lakatos, Imre (1978). Worrall, J.; Currie, G. (eds.). Mathematics, Science and Epistemology: Philosophical Papers. Vol. 2. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521280303.
Lakatos, Imre (1968). Problems in the Philosophy of Mathematics. North Holland. OCLC 254371777.
Leibniz, G.W. (1966). Parkinson, G.H.R. (ed.). Logical Papers (1666–1690). Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198243069.
Maddy, Penelope (1997). Naturalism in Mathematics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780191518973. OCLC 1200106111.
Maziarz, Edward A.; Greenwood, Thomas (1995). Greek Mathematical Philosophy. Barnes and Noble Books. ISBN 9781566199544.
Mount, Matthew, Classical Greek Mathematical Philosophy, [citation needed].
Parsons, Charles (2014). Philosophy of Mathematics in the Twentieth Century: Selected Essays. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-72806-6.
Peirce, Benjamin (1870), "Linear Associative Algebra", § 1.  See Peirce, B. (1881). "Linear Associative Algebra". American Journal of Mathematics. 4 (1): 97–229. doi:10.2307/2369153. JSTOR 2369153.
Peirce, C.S., Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vols. 1-6, Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss (eds.), vols. 7-8, Arthur W. Burks (ed.), Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1931 – 1935, 1958.  Cited as CP (volume).(paragraph).
Peirce, C.S., various pieces on mathematics and logic, many readable online through links at the Charles Sanders Peirce bibliography, especially under Books authored or edited by Peirce, published in his lifetime and the two sections following it.
Plato, "The Republic, Volume 1", Paul Shorey (trans.), pp. 1–535 in Plato, Volume 5, Loeb Classical Library, William Heinemann, London, UK, 1930.
Plato, "The Republic, Volume 2", Paul Shorey (trans.), pp. 1–521 in Plato, Volume 6, Loeb Classical Library, William Heinemann, London, UK, 1935.
Resnik, Michael D. (1980). Frege and the Philosophy of Mathematics. Cornell University. ISBN 9780801412936.
Resnik, Michael (1997). Mathematics as a Science of Patterns. Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-825014-2.
Robinson, Gilbert de B. (1959). The Foundations of Geometry (4th ed.). University of Toronto Press. ISBN 9780802011039.
Raymond, Eric S. (1993). "The Utility of Mathematics".
Smullyan, Raymond M. (1993). Recursion Theory for Metamathematics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195082326.
Russell, Bertrand (1993) [1919]. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. Routledge. ISBN 9780486277240. OCLC 1097317975.
Shapiro, Stewart (2000). Thinking About Mathematics: The Philosophy of Mathematics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780192893062.
Strohmeier, John; Westbrook, Peter (1999). Divine Harmony, The Life and Teachings of Pythagoras. Berkeley Hills Books. ISBN 9780985424114.
Styazhkin, N.I. (1975) [1969]. History of Mathematical Logic from Leibniz to Peano. MIT Press. ISBN 9780262690492.
Tait, William W. (1986). "Truth and Proof: The Platonism of Mathematics". Synthese. 69 (3): 341–370. doi:10.1007/BF00413978. JSTOR 20116347. S2CID 10240391.  Reprinted in Hart 1996, pp. 142–167
Tarski, A. (1983). Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics: Papers from 1923 to 1938 (2nd ed.). Hackett. ISBN 0-915144-76-X.
Ulam, S.M. (2022) [1990]. Bednarek, A.R.; Ulam, Françoise (eds.). Analogies Between Analogies: The Mathematical Reports of S.M. Ulam and His Los Alamos Collaborators. University of California Press. ISBN 9780520302303.
van Heijenoort, Jean, ed. (2002) [1967]. From Frege To Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674324497.
Wigner, E. P. (1960). "The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences. Richard Courant lecture in mathematical sciences delivered at New York University, May 11, 1959". Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics. 13 (1): 1–14. Bibcode:1960CPAM...13....1W. doi:10.1002/cpa.3160130102. S2CID 6112252.
Wilder, Raymond L. (1980). Mathematics as a Cultural System. Pergamon. ISBN 9780080257969.
Witzany, Guenther (2011). "Can mathematics explain the evolution of human language?". Communicative and Integrative Biology. 4 (5): 516–520. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1043.1595. doi:10.4161/cib.16426. PMC 3204117. PMID 22046452.
External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to Philosophy of mathematics.

Philosophy of mathematics at PhilPapers
Philosophy of mathematics at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project
Horsten, Leon. "Philosophy of Mathematics". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Philosophy of mathematics". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Mathematical Structuralism, Internet Encyclopaedia of Philosophy
Abstractionism, Internet Encyclopaedia of Philosophy
"Ludwig Wittgenstein: Later Philosophy of Mathematics". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
The London Philosophy Study Guide Archived 2009-09-23 at the Wayback Machine offers many suggestions on what to read, depending on the student's familiarity with the subject:
Philosophy of Mathematics Archived 2009-06-20 at the Wayback Machine
Mathematical Logic Archived 2009-01-25 at the Wayback Machine
Set Theory & Further Logic Archived 2009-02-27 at the Wayback Machine
R.B. Jones' philosophy of mathematics page
Philosophy of mathematics at Curlie
Corfield, David. "The Philosophy of Real Mathematics – Blog".
Peirce, C.S. (1998). "22. New Elements (Καινα Στοιχεία)". In Peirce Edition Project (ed.). The Essential Peirce, Selected Philosophical Writings. Vol. 2 (1893–1913). Indiana University Press. pp. 300–324. ISBN 9780253007810.
vtePhilosophyBranchesBranches
Aesthetics
Applied philosophy
Epistemology
Ethics
Logic
Metaphilosophy
Metaphysics
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of mathematics
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of religion
Philosophy of science
Political philosophy
Practical philosophy
Social philosophy
Theoretical philosophy
Aesthetics
Aesthetic response
Formalism
Institutionalism
Epistemology
Empiricism
Fideism
Naturalism
Particularism
Rationalism
Skepticism
Solipsism
Ethics
Consequentialism
Deontology
Virtue
Free will
Compatibilism
Determinism
Hard
Incompatibilism
Hard
Libertarianism
Metaphysics
Atomism
Dualism
Idealism
Monism
Naturalism
Realism
Mind
Behaviorism
Eliminativism
Emergentism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Objectivism
Subjectivism
Normativity
Absolutism
Particularism
Relativism
Nihilism
Skepticism
Universalism
Ontology
Action
Event
Process
Reality
Anti-realism
Conceptualism
Idealism
Materialism
Naturalism
Nominalism
Physicalism
Realism
By eraBy era
Ancient
Western
Medieval
Renaissance
Early modern
Modern
Contemporary
AncientChinese
Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Legalism
Logicians
Mohism
Chinese naturalism
Taoism
Yangism
Greco-Roman
Presocratic
Ionians
Pythagoreans
Eleatics
Atomists
Sophists
Cyrenaics
Cynicism
Eretrian school
Megarian school
Academy
Peripatetic school
Hellenistic philosophy
Pyrrhonism
Stoicism
Epicureanism
Academic Skepticism
Middle Platonism
School of the Sextii
Neopythagoreanism
Second Sophistic
Neoplatonism
Church Fathers
Indian
Hindu
Samkhya
Nyaya
Vaisheshika
Yoga
Mīmāṃsā
Ājīvika
Ajñana
Cārvāka
Jain
Anekantavada
Syādvāda
Buddhist
Abhidharma
Sarvāstivadā
Pudgalavada
Sautrāntika
Madhyamaka
Svatantrika and Prasangika
Śūnyatā
Yogacara
Tibetan
Persian
Mazdakism
Mithraism
Zoroastrianism
Zurvanism
MedievalEast Asian
Neotaoism
Tiantai
Huayan
Chan
Zen
Neo-Confucianism
Korean Confucianism
European
Christian
Augustinianism
Scholasticism
Thomism
Scotism
Occamism
Renaissance humanism
Indian
Vedanta
Acintya bheda abheda
Advaita
Bhedabheda
Dvaita
Nimbarka Sampradaya
Shuddhadvaita
Vishishtadvaita
Navya-Nyāya
Islamic
Aristotelianism
Averroism
Avicennism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Sufi
Jewish
Judeo-Islamic
Modern
Anarchism
Classical Realism
Collectivism
Conservatism
Determinism
Dualism
Edo neo-Confucianism
Empiricism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Historicism
Holism
Humanism
Anti-
Idealism
Absolute
British
German
Objective
Subjective
Transcendental
Individualism
Kokugaku
Liberalism
Materialism
Modernism
Monism
Naturalism
Natural law
Nihilism
New Confucianism
Neo-scholasticism
Pragmatism
Phenomenology
Positivism
Reductionism
Rationalism
Social contract
Socialism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
People
Cartesianism
Kantianism
Neo
Kierkegaardianism
Krausism
Hegelianism
Marxism
Newtonianism
Nietzscheanism
Spinozism
ContemporaryAnalytic
Applied ethics
Analytic feminism
Analytical Marxism
Communitarianism
Consequentialism
Critical rationalism
Experimental philosophy
Falsificationism
Foundationalism / Coherentism
Internalism and externalism
Logical positivism
Legal positivism
Meta-ethics
Moral realism
Quinean naturalism
Normative ethics
Ordinary language philosophy
Postanalytic philosophy
Quietism
Rawlsian
Reformed epistemology
Systemics
Scientism
Scientific realism
Scientific skepticism
Transactionalism
Contemporary utilitarianism
Vienna Circle
Wittgensteinian
Continental
Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Feminist
Frankfurt School
Hermeneutics
Neo-Marxism
New Historicism
Phenomenology
Posthumanism
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Social constructionism
Structuralism
Western Marxism
Miscellaneous
Kyoto School
Objectivism
Postcritique
Russian cosmism
more...
By regionBy regionAfrican
Bantu
Egyptian
Ethiopian
Africana
Eastern
Buddhist
Chinese
Indian
Indonesian
Japanese
Korean
Taiwanese
Vietnamese
Middle Eastern
Iranian
Islamic
Jewish
Pakistani
Turkish
Western
American
Australian
British
Scottish
Canada
Czech
Danish
Dutch
French
German
Greek
Italian
Maltese
Polish
Slovene
Spanish
Miscellaneous
Amerindian
Aztec
Romanian
Russian
Yugoslav

 Philosophy portal
 Category

vteLogic
Outline
History
Major fields
Computer science
Formal semantics (natural language)
Inference
Philosophy of logic
Proof
Semantics of logic
Syntax
Logics
Classical
Informal
Critical thinking
Reason
Mathematical
Non-classical
Philosophical
Theories
Argumentation
Metalogic
Metamathematics
Set

Foundations
Abduction
Analytic and synthetic propositions
Contradiction
Paradox
Antinomy
Deduction
Deductive closure
Definition
Description
Entailment
Linguistic
Form
Induction
Logical truth
Name
Necessity and sufficiency
Premise
Probability
Reference
Statement
Substitution
Truth
Validity
Liststopics
Mathematical logic
Boolean algebra
Set theory
other
Logicians
Rules of inference
Paradoxes
Fallacies
Logic symbols

 Philosophy portal
Category
WikiProject (talk)
changes

vteMajor mathematics areas
History
Timeline
Future
Lists
Glossary
Foundations
Category theory
Information theory
Mathematical logic
Philosophy of mathematics
Set theory
Type theory
Algebra
Abstract
Commutative
Elementary
Group theory
Linear
Multilinear
Universal
Homological
Analysis
Calculus
Real analysis
Complex analysis
Hypercomplex analysis
Differential equations
Functional analysis
Harmonic analysis
Measure theory
Discrete
Combinatorics
Graph theory
Order theory
Geometry
Algebraic
Analytic
Arithmetic
Differential
Discrete
Euclidean
Finite
Number theory
Arithmetic
Algebraic number theory
Analytic number theory
Diophantine geometry
Topology
General
Algebraic
Differential
Geometric
Homotopy theory
Applied
Engineering mathematics
Mathematical biology
Mathematical chemistry
Mathematical economics
Mathematical finance
Mathematical physics
Mathematical psychology
Mathematical sociology
Mathematical statistics
Probability
Statistics
Systems science
Control theory
Game theory
Operations research
Computational
Computer science
Theory of computation
Computational complexity theory
Numerical analysis
Optimization
Computer algebra
Related topics
Mathematicians
lists
Informal mathematics
Films about mathematicians
Recreational mathematics
Mathematics and art
Mathematics education

 Mathematics portal
 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject

vteMathematical logicGeneral
Axiom
list
Cardinality
First-order logic
Formal proof
Formal semantics
Foundations of mathematics
Information theory
Lemma
Logical consequence
Model
Theorem
Theory
Type theory
Theorems (list) and paradoxes
Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems
Tarski's undefinability
Banach–Tarski paradox
Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument
Compactness
Halting problem
Lindström's
Löwenheim–Skolem
Russell's paradox
LogicsTraditional
Classical logic
Logical truth
Tautology
Proposition
Inference
Logical equivalence
Consistency
Equiconsistency
Argument
Soundness
Validity
Syllogism
Square of opposition
Venn diagram
Propositional
Boolean algebra
Boolean functions
Logical connectives
Propositional calculus
Propositional formula
Truth tables
Many-valued logic
3
finite
∞
Predicate
First-order
list
Second-order
Monadic
Higher-order
Fixed-point
Free
Quantifiers
Predicate
Monadic predicate calculus
Set theory
Set
hereditary
Class
(Ur-)Element
Ordinal number
Extensionality
Forcing
Relation
equivalence
partition
Set operations:
intersection
union
complement
Cartesian product
power set
identities
Types of sets
Countable
Uncountable
Empty
Inhabited
Singleton
Finite
Infinite
Transitive
Ultrafilter
Recursive
Fuzzy
Universal
Universe
constructible
Grothendieck
Von Neumann
Maps and cardinality
Function/Map
domain
codomain
image
In/Sur/Bi-jection
Schröder–Bernstein theorem
Isomorphism
Gödel numbering
Enumeration
Large cardinal
inaccessible
Aleph number
Operation
binary
Set theories
Zermelo–Fraenkel
axiom of choice
continuum hypothesis
General
Kripke–Platek
Morse–Kelley
Naive
New Foundations
Tarski–Grothendieck
Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel
Ackermann
Constructive
Formal systems (list),language and syntax
Alphabet
Arity
Automata
Axiom schema
Expression
ground
Extension
by definition
conservative
Relation
Formation rule
Grammar
Formula
atomic
closed
ground
open
Free/bound variable
Language
Metalanguage
Logical connective
¬
∨
∧
→
↔
=
Predicate
functional
variable
propositional variable
Proof
Quantifier
∃
!
∀
rank
Sentence
atomic
spectrum
Signature
String
Substitution
Symbol
function
logical/constant
non-logical
variable
Term
Theory
list
Example axiomaticsystems (list)
of arithmetic:
Peano
second-order
elementary function
primitive recursive
Robinson
Skolem
of the real numbers
Tarski's axiomatization
of Boolean algebras
canonical
minimal axioms
of geometry:
Euclidean:
Elements
Hilbert's
Tarski's
non-Euclidean
Principia Mathematica
Proof theory
Formal proof
Natural deduction
Logical consequence
Rule of inference
Sequent calculus
Theorem
Systems
axiomatic
deductive
Hilbert
list
Complete theory
Independence (from ZFC)
Proof of impossibility
Ordinal analysis
Reverse mathematics
Self-verifying theories
Model theory
Interpretation
function
of models
Model
equivalence
finite
saturated
spectrum
submodel
Non-standard model
of arithmetic
Diagram
elementary
Categorical theory
Model complete theory
Satisfiability
Semantics of logic
Strength
Theories of truth
semantic
Tarski's
Kripke's
T-schema
Transfer principle
Truth predicate
Truth value
Type
Ultraproduct
Validity
Computability theory
Church encoding
Church–Turing thesis
Computably enumerable
Computable function
Computable set
Decision problem
decidable
undecidable
P
NP
P versus NP problem
Kolmogorov complexity
Lambda calculus
Primitive recursive function
Recursion
Recursive set
Turing machine
Type theory
Related
Abstract logic
Algebraic logic
Automated theorem proving
Category theory
Concrete/Abstract category
Category of sets
History of logic
History of mathematical logic
timeline
Logicism
Mathematical object
Philosophy of mathematics
Supertask
 Mathematics portal
Authority control databases: National 
Israel
United States
Latvia
Czech Republic





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy_of_mathematics&oldid=1228039498"
Category: Philosophy of mathematicsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles needing additional references from April 2022All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia introduction cleanup from August 2021All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from August 2021All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyWikipedia neutral point of view disputes from November 2022All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputesArticles to be expanded from November 2022Articles with multiple maintenance issuesPages using sidebar with the child parameterAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2011Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2010Articles that may contain original research from February 2023All articles that may contain original researchArticles with unsourced statements from February 2023Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2023Articles needing additional references from November 2015Wikipedia spam cleanup from August 2010Wikipedia further reading cleanupArticles with unsourced statements from February 2007Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy linksArticles with Curlie linksCS1: long volume valueArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with LNB identifiersArticles with NKC identifiers






 This page was last edited on 9 June 2024, at 04:22 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view


















