





 










Prime Numbers in Cryptography



















 



 













 

LinkedIn and 3rd parties use essential and non-essential cookies to provide, secure, analyze and improve our Services, and to show you relevant ads (including professional and job ads) on and off LinkedIn. Learn more in our Cookie Policy.Select Accept to consent or Reject to decline non-essential cookies for this use. You can update your choices at any time in your settings.




                Accept
                

                Reject
                


 










                Agree & Join LinkedIn
              

      By clicking Continue to join or sign in, you agree to LinkedIn’s User Agreement, Privacy Policy, and Cookie Policy.
    

























 








                Sign in to view more content
              

                  Create your free account or sign in to continue your search
                
 



            Sign in
        



 







                Welcome back
            










 





          Email or phone
        









          Password
        


Show





 

Forgot password?



          Sign in
        



              or
            






      By clicking Continue to join or sign in, you agree to LinkedIn’s User Agreement, Privacy Policy, and Cookie Policy.
    

 



                New to LinkedIn? Join now



 






                    or
                  





      By clicking Continue to join or sign in, you agree to LinkedIn’s User Agreement, Privacy Policy, and Cookie Policy.
    

 



                New to LinkedIn? Join now



 






      Skip to main content
    



LinkedIn










        Articles
      







        People
      







        Learning
      







        Jobs
      







        Games
      





      Join now
    

          Sign in
      





 






 






 




https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/roots-of-unity/a-curious-sequence-of-prime-numbers/



Prime Numbers in Cryptography











                      Report this article
                    
    




 





              
          
        Ashok Hegde
      
      
          




            
        Ashok Hegde
      
          

              
            Consultant
                
            


                
          Published Jul 8, 2023
      
              



            + Follow
          









Prime Numbers have fascinated mathematicians for a long time. The earliest documented history dates from 500 BCE to 300 BCE when Greek mathematicians studied prime numbers. Euclid also showed that if the number 2n – 1 is prime then the number 2n - 1(2n – 1) is a perfect number. A perfect number is a positive integer that is equal to the sum of its proper divisors. The smallest perfect number is 6, which is the sum of 1,2 and 3.





Earlier primes were thought to be distributed among the integers in a rather haphazard way. For example, in the 100 numbers immediately before 10,000,000, there are 9 primes, while in the 100 numbers after there are only 2 primes. However, the distribution of primes within the natural numbers in the large can be statistically modeled. The first result in that direction is the Prime Number Theorem, proven at the end of the 19th century, which says that the probability of a randomly chosen large number being prime is inversely proportional to its number of digits, that is, to its logarithm. This property plays an important role in the mining of Bitcoins. But that is perhaps the subject of another post.





This post shall focus on the property of factoring large numbers into their prime factors, which plays an important part in public-key cryptography. First, let’s look at why this is a challenge, and we shall see how this is used in cryptography.











7-digit number                     1407673





8-digit number                    13309117





9-digit number                  137937281





10-digit number               1438671211





11-digit number             14698154927





12-digit number           135677280727





13-digit number         1389864140741





14-digit number       13472900573921





15-digit number     130062255272767





 





The above table shows different numbers that are products of two large prime numbers. Each number is about 10 times bigger than the previous number. Let us estimate how time increases in finding such large primes for numbers. Suppose A is the product of two 4-digit primes, and B is a product of two 5-digit primes. Suppose that each 5-digit prime is about 10 times bigger than the corresponding 4-digit prime. Hence to find the first factor we shall need an algorithm that has to check about 10 times more numbers. As our product is bigger and the numbers, we use to check are bigger, each check takes more time on average. So, we see that adding a few digits to our prime numbers makes factoring the product much, much harder.





We have in an earlier post been introduced to RSA cryptographic algorithm. A quick recap. RSA is an asymmetric cryptographic algorithm – which means it works with two different keys. One is the user's or system's public key which is used for encryption, and the other private key is used for decryption. Now only the system or user can decrypt the data using the private key since it is not shared.





 The process followed in the generation of keys is - 




Recommended by LinkedIn




For the love of Prime Numbers-Part 2


                    Selva Kumaraswamy
                   

                  

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      1 year ago
  
                







Cryptography: A New Era: Randomness is King (Not just…


                    Gideon Samid
                   

                  

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      8 months ago
  
                







The History of Cryptography


                    Mint Dice
                   

                  

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      3 years ago
  
                










Generate the RSA modulus (n)









Select two large primes, p and q.
Calculate n=p*q. For strong unbreakable encryption, let n be a large number, typically a minimum of 512 bits.









Generate the Derived Number (e)









Number e must be greater than 1 and less than (p − 1) (q − 1).
There must be no common factor for e and (p – 1) (q − 1) except for 1. In other words, two numbers e and (p – 1) (q – 1) are coprime.









Generate the public key









The pair of numbers (n, e) form the RSA public key and is made public.
Interestingly, though n is part of the public key, difficulty in factorizing a large prime number ensures that the attacker cannot find in finite time the two primes (p & q) used to obtain n. This is the strength of RSA.









Generate the private key









Private Key d is calculated from p, q, and e. For given n and e, there is a unique number d.
Number d is the inverse of e modulo (p - 1) (q – 1). This means that d is the number less than (p - 1) (q - 1) such that when multiplied by e, it is equal to 1 modulo (p – 1) (q - 1).
This relationship is written mathematically as follows −







	ed = 1 mod (p − 1) (q − 1)





    The Extended Euclidean Algorithm takes p, q, and e as input and gives d as output.





 Given the computational complexity in determining the pair of primes p and q, given the public key, it becomes increasingly difficult if the length of the keys is sufficiently large.





Of course, the encryption and decryption under RSA using these keys is suitably complex by itself. But it is the unique property of Prime Numbers that makes it near impossible to crack.





Do you know of any other application of Prime Numbers?





References:





https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_number





https://mathshistory.st-andrews.ac.uk/HistTopics/Prime_numbers/#:~:text=Prime%20numbers%20and%20their%20properties,their%20mystical%20and%20numerological%20properties.





 http://web.math.princeton.edu/math_alive/Crypto/Lab2/Factorization.html#:~:text=As%20our%20product%20is%20bigger,the%20product%20much%2C%20much%20harder.





 https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/rsa-algorithm-cryptography/





 https://www.tutorialspoint.com/cryptography/public_key_encryption.htm


 


Help improve contributions
Mark contributions as unhelpful if you find them irrelevant or not valuable to the article. This feedback is private to you and won’t be shared publicly.
Got it






Contribution hidden for you
This feedback is never shared publicly, we’ll use it to show better contributions to everyone.

Undo


 








 




 


Like









                  Comment
                










Copy





LinkedIn





Facebook





Twitter







              Share
            









                    2
              


 

 



 






 


        To view or add a comment, sign in









More articles by this author
 



                No more previous content
              












 



          CO2 Emissions
        

            
        Apr 8, 2024
      
          
 







 



          Greenhouse Gases Primer
        

            
        Mar 16, 2024
      
          
 







 



          Solar Energy
        

            
        Jul 16, 2023
      
          
 







 



          AI - Challenges and Opportunities
        

            
        Mar 30, 2023
      
          
 







 



          The Changing World of IoT
        

            
        Dec 26, 2022
      
          
 







 



          From Disruption To Despair
        

            
        Dec 1, 2022
      
          
 







 



          Cryptography
        

            
        Nov 27, 2022
      
          
 







 



          Decentralized Finance
        

            
        Nov 18, 2022
      
          
 







 



          Governance
        

            
        Dec 9, 2020
      
          
 







 



          Brief History and Introduction to Numerical Systems
        

            
        Nov 8, 2017
      
          
 







                No more next content
              








See all














              Insights from the community
            









              Algorithms
            

              How can modular arithmetic help you perform fast exponentiation?
            
 






              Algorithms
            

              What is the significance of the seed value in random number generation algorithms?
            
 






              Encryption
            

              How does classical cryptography compare to quantum cryptography in terms of speed and efficiency?
            
 






              Quantum Computing
            

              How can we protect classical cryptography from quantum attacks?
            
 






              Quantum Computing
            

              How can we educate and train more developers and researchers on quantum resistant algorithms?
            
 






              Computer Science
            

              How can you test and debug quantum algorithms?
            
 






              Algorithms
            

              How does Shor's algorithm compare to other factoring algorithms?
            
 






              Technological Innovation
            

              What are the best ways to use quantum computing in cryptography?
            
 






              Algorithms
            

              How do you design and analyze lattice-based zero-knowledge proofs and protocols?
            
 






              Quantum Computing
            

              What are the most promising alternatives or enhancements to Shor's algorithm for quantum cryptography?
            
 




                Show more
              


                Show less
              






              Others also viewed
            











 


            
        The History of Cryptography
      
 





            Mint Dice
          

            

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      3y
  
          

 









 


            
        Part 2 – Is Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) a step towards something more - Understanding ECC
      
 





            Peter Reid
          

            

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      7y
  
          

 









 


            
        What You Didn’t Know What Math Did In Technology
      
 





            Franklyn Gonzalez
          

            

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      5y
  
          

 









 


            
        Five Simple Ideas at the heart of Cryptography
      
 





            Warren McPherson
          

            

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      8y
  
          

 









 


            
        How is math used in cryptography?
      
 





            Sathiyaraj G
          

            

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      1y
  
          

 









 


            
        History of Cryptography
      
 





            Cyfa Technologies
          

            

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      2y
  
          

 









 


            
        For the love of Prime Numbers - Part 1
      
 





            Selva Kumaraswamy
          

            

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      1y
  
          

 









 


            
        The Code Book by Simon Singh
      
 





            Andrew Wan
          

            

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      3w
  
          

 









 


            
        Primes - a long story short..
      
 





            Karol Sabat
          

            

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      3y
  
          

 









 


            
        Note for the Millennium Prize Problems
      
 





            Frank Vega
          

            

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

      1mo
  
          

 





                Show more
              


                Show less
              







              Explore topics
            





                Sales
              



                Marketing
              



                Business Administration
              



                HR Management
              



                Content Management
              



                Engineering
              



                Soft Skills
              



              See All
            












LinkedIn

© 2024



          
          About
        
        



          
          Accessibility
        
        



          
          User Agreement
        
        



          
          Privacy Policy
        
        




          
          Cookie Policy
        
        



          
          Copyright Policy
        
        



          
          Brand Policy
        
        



          
            Guest Controls
          
        



          
          Community Guidelines
        
        









                العربية (Arabic)
            




                Čeština (Czech)
            




                Dansk (Danish)
            




                Deutsch (German)
            




English (English)





                Español (Spanish)
            




                Français (French)
            




                हिंदी (Hindi)
            




                Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian)
            




                Italiano (Italian)
            




                日本語 (Japanese)
            




                한국어 (Korean)
            




                Bahasa Malaysia (Malay)
            




                Nederlands (Dutch)
            




                Norsk (Norwegian)
            




                Polski (Polish)
            




                Português (Portuguese)
            




                Română (Romanian)
            




                Русский (Russian)
            




                Svenska (Swedish)
            




                ภาษาไทย (Thai)
            




                Tagalog (Tagalog)
            




                Türkçe (Turkish)
            




                Українська (Ukrainian)
            




                简体中文 (Chinese (Simplified))
            




                正體中文 (Chinese (Traditional))
            





            Language
          





 














