



Pythagoras | Biography, Facts & Impact | Study.com













































for Teachers
for Schools
for Working Scholars®
for College Credit


























Log In


Sign Up

Menu
					










									Plans
							



									Subjects
							





Art


Business


Computer Science


Education & Teaching


English


Health & Medicine


History


Humanities


Math


Psychology


Science


Social Science







							 
						



									Art
							



									Architecture 




									Art History 




									Design 




									Performing Arts 




									Visual Arts 






							 
						



									Business
							



									Accounting 




									Business Administration 




									Business Communication 




									Business Ethics 




									Business Intelligence 




									Business Law 




									Economics 




									Finance 




									Healthcare Administration 




									Human Resources 




									Information Technology 




									International Business 




									Operations Management 




									Real Estate 




									Sales & Marketing 






							 
						



									Computer Science
							



									Computer Engineering 




									Computer Programming 




									Cybersecurity 




									Data Science 




									Software 






							 
						



									Education & Teaching
							



									Education Law & Policy 




									Pedagogy & Teaching Strategies 




									Special & Specialized Education 




									Student Support in Education 




									Teaching English Language Learners 






							 
						



									English
							



									Grammar 




									Literature 




									Public Speaking 




									Reading 




									Vocabulary 




									Writing & Composition 






							 
						



									Health & Medicine
							



									Counseling & Therapy 




									Health 




									Medicine 




									Nursing 




									Nutrition 






							 
						



									History
							



									US History 




									World History 






							 
						



									Humanities
							



									Communication 




									Ethics 




									Foreign Languages 




									Philosophy 




									Religious Studies 






							 
						



									Math
							



									Algebra 




									Basic Math 




									Calculus 




									Geometry 




									Statistics 




									Trigonometry 






							 
						



									Psychology
							



									Clinical & Abnormal Psychology 




									Cognitive Science 




									Developmental Psychology 




									Educational Psychology 




									Organizational Psychology 




									Social Psychology 






							 
						



									Science
							



									Anatomy & Physiology 




									Astronomy 




									Biology 




									Chemistry 




									Earth Science 




									Engineering 




									Environmental Science 




									Physics 






							 
						



									Social Science
							



									Anthropology 




									Criminal Justice 




									Geography 




									Law 




									Linguistics 




									Political Science 




									Sociology 







									Courses
							





By Subject


By Education Level


Adult Education


Transferable Credit







							By Subject
						



									Arts 




									Business 




									Computer Science 




									Education & Teaching 




									English (ELA) 




									Foreign Language 




									Health & Medicine 




									History 




									Humanities 




									Math 




									Psychology 




									Science 




									Social Science 






							By Education Level
						



									Elementary School 




									Middle School 




									High School 




									College 




									Graduate and Post-Grad 







									Test Prep
							





Teacher Certification Exams


Nursing Exams


Allied Health & Medicine Exams


Real Estate Exams


All Test Prep







							 
						



									Teacher Certification Exams
							



									Praxis 




									FTCE 




									TExES 




									CSET & CBEST 




									More Teacher Certification Test Prep 






							 
						



									Nursing Exams
							



									NCLEX 




									HESI 




									More Nursing Test Prep 






							 
						



									Allied Health & Medicine Exams
							



									ASCP 




									CNA 




									CNS 




									More Medical Test Prep 






							 
						



									Real Estate Exams
							



									Real Estate Sales 




									Real Estate Brokers 




									Real Estate Appraisals 







									Teach
							





Teaching Resources and Curriculum


Skills Practice


Lesson Plans


Teacher Certification


Teacher Professional Development








									Tutoring
							





Math Tutoring


Science Tutoring


Business Tutoring


Humanities Tutoring







							 
						



									Math Tutoring
							



									Algebra  Tutoring




									Calculus  Tutoring




									Geometry  Tutoring




									Pre-calculus  Tutoring




									Statistics  Tutoring




									Trigonometry  Tutoring






							 
						



									Science Tutoring
							



									Biology  Tutoring




									Chemistry  Tutoring




									Physics  Tutoring






							 
						



									Business Tutoring
							



									Accounting  Tutoring




									Economics  Tutoring




									Finance  Tutoring






							 
						



									Humanities Tutoring
							



									History  Tutoring




									Literature  Tutoring




									Writing  Tutoring






Sign Up

























Copyright










 History Courses
			
			/
			
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	

	
	
	
		
		
		
		
		
			
AP World History: Help and Review
Course




		Pythagoras | Biography, Facts & Impact
	






Lesson



						
							
								Additional Info
							
							
						
					




					Sasha Blakeley, Christopher Muscato
			


Author

Sasha Blakeley
Sasha Blakeley has a Bachelor's in English Literature from McGill University and a TEFL certification. She has been teaching English in Canada and Taiwan for seven years.

					View bio
				


Instructor

Christopher Muscato
Chris has a master's degree in history and teaches at the University of Northern Colorado. 

					View bio
				



							Learn who Pythagoras of Samos was by exploring where and when he was born, what he was known for, and his contributions to the fields of math and philosophy.
						
								
									Updated: 11/21/2023
								






Table of ContentsWho is Pythagoras of Samos? What did Pythagoras do? Pythagoras' Impact Lesson SummaryShow 



Frequently Asked Questions



Who did Pythagoras teach?

Pythagoras taught the Pythagoreans, who were the members of his society. He also strongly influenced Plato, a philosopher who lived after his death and who accepted many of his philosophical beliefs.



What is Pythagoras known for?

Today, Pythagoras is primarily known for his contributions to geometry, especially the Pythagorean Theorem. In his own lifetime, he was known as a philosopher and an eccentric mystic.



What theorem did Pythagoras of Samos prove?

Pythagoras proved the Pythagorean Theorem, which states that the sum of the squares of the legs of a right angle triangle is equal to the square of the hypotenuse. Today, this theorem is the most enduring aspect of Pythagoras' legacy.



Did Pythagoras live in Samos?

Yes, Pythagoras did live on the island of Samos as a young man. He was born there, but he traveled extensively and ended up living in southern Italy.












		Create an account
		




Table of ContentsWho is Pythagoras of Samos? What did Pythagoras do? Pythagoras' Impact Lesson SummaryShow 






Who is Pythagoras of Samos?



Pythagoras, sometimes known as Pythagoras of Samos, was an ancient Greek mathematician and philosopher. Today, many people are familiar with Pythagoras because of the famous Pythagorean Theorem, which is a mathematical formula for finding the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle. It states that the sum of the squares of the two non-hypotenuse sides of the triangle is equal to the square of the hypotenuse. In addition to this ubiquitous theorem, Pythagoras made many other contributions to the intellectual landscape of the ancient world.When and Where was Pythagoras born?As with many figures in the ancient world, it is difficult to ascertain with any certainty exactly when Pythagoras was born. Most biographers today put his date of birth around 570 BCE. He was born on Samos, an island that was part of ancient Greece. His father was a merchant and his family's wealth ensured that Pythagoras had access to a good education. Unfortunately, little else is known about Pythagoras' early life. Indeed, virtually everything that is known about his life is speculative, as he was shrouded in mystery and most sources describing him were written many years after his death. Many biographies claim that Pythagoras had divine powers and some differ wildly on the important dates in his life. What is most significant about Pythagoras is his work and the sway that he had on those around him, rather than the specifics of his biography.
Travels and TeachingOne of the few Pythagoras facts that can be nailed down with any certainty is that he traveled extensively. He likely spent time in Babylon and Egypt as a child or a young man. He learned from a number of other philosophers, including Thales and Anaximander, and over time he developed a keen interest in mathematics. At some point, Pythagoras emigrated to southern Italy, where he was to settle for the rest of his life. In Croton, Italy, Pythagoras became the founder of a mysterious philosophical school. His followers were called Pythagoreans.

All depictions of Pythagoras were created long after his death






Those who joined Pythagoras' society lived communally with no personal possessions. They maintained a vegetarian diet and held a number of notable spiritual beliefs, including a belief in reincarnation. Both men and women were permitted to join Pythagoras' society, which was somewhat unusual for the time. The Pythagoreans sometimes made enemies because they were secretive about their knowledge and because they were considered spiritually and intellectually powerful. It is impossible to say exactly what the Pythagoreans believed or did, as records are again mysterious and largely based on hearsay. According to some sources, Pythagoreans were forbidden from eating or touching beans, though this may well be apocryphal.Pythagoras' DeathLike so many other aspects of his life, Pythagoras' death is a mystery. He may have died between 497 and 480 BCE, though even this range of dates is uncertain. He likely fled Croton because he and his followers were facing persecution, and most biographers believe that he went to Metapontum in Italy. Some believe that he killed himself because he was distraught over the attacks on his society, while others claim that he was murdered by those who considered him a dangerous mystic. According to one story, Pythagoras was chased by those who wanted to murder him, but he allowed himself to be caught rather than step into a bean field, owing to his belief that eating or even touching beans was morally repugnant. The Pythagorean order continued after Pythagoras' death, but it was eventually suppressed because it was considered politically threatening.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account













									Lesson
							



									Quiz
								



									Course
								



						














	
	
							35K
							views







What did Pythagoras do?



Few historical figures are more obscure than Pythagoras when it comes to determining his actual impact. Pythagoras' society was no doubt influential, and Pythagoras himself certainly contributed to the intellectual landscape of his time, but it is almost impossible to determine which aspects of his philosophy originated with him and which ones originated with his followers. Biographers and historians have to use guesswork and inference when determining exactly what Pythagoras' influence actually was. This is largely because none of his writings survive, if he had any to begin with. His impact is often considered essentially tied to the influence of his society, as he cannot be extricated from the Pythagoreans or understood clearly as an individual. He was certainly a philosopher, a mathematician, and a mystic with unusual and influential beliefs.Mathematics and Science

Pythagoras is primarily associated with geometry and mathematics today







Pythagoras' contributions to mathematics, and especially to geometry, are famous today. The Pythagorean Theorem mentioned above is his most notable contribution to the field, though some historians believe that it was actually developed by one of his followers and not by Pythagoras himself. He also studied triangular and perfect numbers, sometimes describing them as though they had specific personalities. Pythagoras may have discovered irrational numbers, which are extraordinarily important in mathematics. He also studied astronomy, though he believed (like most at his time) that the Earth was at the center of the universe. He may have been the first to make a comprehensive study of Venus as both the morning and evening star. Pythagoras was also supposedly an accomplished musician who incorporated number theory into his music.PhilosophyPythagoras was an extreme ascetic, swearing off many earthly pleasures in pursuit of spiritual and philosophical purification. He and his followers remained celibate and did not eat meat. Some sources claim that he ate primarily bread and honey with only the occasional vegetable and that he never drank enough wine to get drunk. Diogenes Laertius even claimed that Pythagoras avoided laughter, so extreme was his commitment to transcending bodily distractions. Plato was strongly influenced by the Pythagorean belief that philosophical inquiry was the ultimate tool for discovering the truths of the universe. Some Pythagorean beliefs were very much ahead of their time, including an early version of what would later become Nietzsche's Eternal Recurrence theory that all things repeat exactly the same way. Pythagoras' beliefs certainly veered toward the mystical just as much as they emphasized rationalism and mathematical certainty.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account















Pythagoras' Impact



What Pythagoras is known for today is not what he was known for during his lifetime. His Pythagorean Theorem is his most famous accomplishment, but historians believe that in his own life he was primarily associated with mysticism rather than mathematics. In life, he was primarily considered to be a philosopher with unusual beliefs. His society was met with a mixture of admiration and suspicion that may have ultimately led to its suppression. The lack of written records from Pythagoras' life makes it challenging to understand him in his own context, but it is undeniable that he managed to carve out a space for himself in history even though records are scarce.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Lesson Summary



Pythagoras was an ancient Greek philosopher, mystic, and mathematician. He was a founder of a secret society dedicated to learning and spiritual purification, though he is best known today as the man who developed the Pythagorean Theorem. This theorem, useful in geometry, is a formula for finding the lengths of the sides of a right triangle. Very little is known about Pythagoras' life, and even his dates of birth and death are speculative. This is primarily because of a lack of written records either by or about him written during his lifetime. Most sources on Pythagoras were written decades or centuries after his death.The followers of Pythagoras were called Pythagoreans. They lived communally, practiced a vegetarian diet, and believed in reincarnation. Sometimes, the Pythagoreans made enemies because they were both powerful and secretive about their knowledge. Some time after Pythagoras' death, his society was suppressed because the Pythagoreans were considered politically volatile and threatening. It is very possible that some of Pythagoras' followers, and not Pythagoras himself, came up with some of his most famous mathematical and philosophical contributions.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account










														
														Additional Info
													



Who was Pythagoras? Who Knows?!You've heard of the Templars. You've probably heard of the Freemasons and the Iluminati. But have you heard of the Pythagoreans? Maybe. Maybe you even know some trivia about them. But you can't know much, because nobody does. They are that secretive of a secret society! 

   Pythagoreans Facing the Sunrise 
 





The Pythagoreans were led by a man named Pythagoras, a mathematician, scientist, and mystic of ancient Greece. Pythagoras is responsible for several notable scientific and philosophical discoveries, but he is most famous for the Pythagorean Theorem in math. His life was very much a mystery, but his teachings shaped the ancient world. 
Life of PythagorasMost of the information on Pythagoras was written down centuries after he died, so there is a lot we don't know about his life. He was born on the island of Samos around 570 BC, and likely travelled across the Mediterranean in his youth to study. Around 530 BC, Pythagoras moved to Croton, in modern-day southern Italy, and established a secretive religious group devoted to the mystical worshipping of the gods. This group was both a religious sect and a school of science, math, music, and philosophy. His followers were called Pythagoreans. It was an extraordinarily secretive society and so we what know about them comes from rumors. We do know that the Pythagoreans believed that souls were reborn after death, they shared communal meals, kept rigorous exercise routines, and were divided into an outer circle of 'listeners' and an inner circle of 'learners'. Only those in the inner circle had access to the deepest secrets of Pythagoras' teachings. The Pythagoreans were one of the oldest secret societies in the world, and may have inspired later groups like the Freemasons. 

   Bust of Pythagoras 
 





As a powerful and secretive society, the Pythagoreans made enemies. It is said that their enemies turned the city of Croton against them, and many were killed in the process. Some accounts say that Pythagoras died in the attack; others say that he escaped and later starved himself to death. The Pythagoreans lost their power but continued to exist for a while. None of Pythagoras' writings have survived, but accounts of him and his followers are found across ancient Greece. The Discoveries of PythagorasPythagoras, and his followers, are attributed with several important mathematical and philosophical discoveries. Since there are no direct writings from Pythagoras, it's unclear which of these came from Pythagoras himself and which were made by the Pythagoreans. In music, Pythagoras is said to have discovered that musical sounds could be translated into mathematical equations and ratios. The fact that string instruments have different size strings to produce different notes is a reflection of this ratio. The Pythagoreans are also credited with introducing the ideas of liberty and freedom to the politics of southern Italy. In science, Pythagoras is the first person to have taught that the earth was spherical, not flat, and that it revolved around the sun. 


Of course, what Pythagoras is most known for is the Pythagorean Theorem. This is a geometric formula which states that the area of the square opposite the right angle of a triangle (the hypotenuse) equals the area of the squares on the other two sides (the legs) added together. To state it more simply, 

  The Pythagorean Theorem
 





Because of this formula, a person who knows the length of two sides of a right triangle can always find the length of the third. If the three sides of right triangle are labeled A, B, and C, with C being the longest side, then (AxA)+(BxB)=(CxC). 





This can have important implications in architecture, construction, and more complicated mathematical equations. This formula was used by ancient Babylonians and Indians long before Pythagoras, but he is said to be the first to construct a proof, a mathematical argument proving that the formula will always be accurate. 

  Pythagoras would be proud
 





Lesson SummaryPythagoras was a secretive and mysterious man. Nevertheless, he was an important philosopher, mathematician, and mystic in ancient Greece. His followers, the Pythagoreans, were one of the oldest secret societies in the world and studied the sciences, math, art, and philosophy. Of their contributions to the world, the most famous is the Pythagorean Theorem, which helps mathematicians find the length of a side of a right triangle. This is important in architecture and geometry. So now you know about Pythagoras. But don't tell anyone. It's a secret.






			
				
				
					To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
				
			
			
			
Create your account













Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?


				I am a student
			

 I am a teacher
			



Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 30 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In

 Back
					


Resources created by teachers for teachers
Over 30,000 video lessons
		& teaching resources‐all
		in one place.
	






Video lessons





Quizzes & Worksheets





Classroom Integration





Lesson Plans



I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues. It’s like a teacher waved a magic wand and did the work for me. I feel like it’s a lifeline.



			Jennifer B.
		

				Teacher
				
				
			

































    
    
		Try it now
	




 Back
	











		Start today. Try it now
		








AP World History: Help and Review


37 chapters |
				
					
					
						444 lessons
						
					
				
			






Ch 1. 
									
										AP World History - Foundational...










Ch 2. 
									
										AP World History - Major Belief...










Ch 3. 
									
										AP World History - Ancient Times: Help...










Ch 4. 
									
										AP World History - Ancient Middle East:...










Ch 5. 
									
										AP World History - Ancient China,...










Ch 6. 
              AP World History - Ancient Greece: Help and Review






							The Minoans
					

							  










9:05
						 



							History of the Alphabet | Overview, Cuneiform & Greek Writing
					

							  










7:08
						 



							The Iliad by Homer | Greek Epic, Characters Map & Analysis
					

							  










13:52
						 



							The Odyssey by Homer | Summary & Analysis
					

							  










18:22
						 



							Bronze Age Greece: Schliemann's Quest for Troy
					

							  










6:39
						 



							From Mycenae's Collapse to Greek Colonization
					

							  










9:15
						 



							Ancient Greek Religion | Overview, Facts & Development
					

							  










17:21
						 



							Greek City-States | Geographical Regions, Government & Features
					

							  










10:54
						 



							Ancient Greek Women | Roles & Rights
					

							  










4:34
						 



							Ancient Greek Art, Pottery and Sculpture
					

							  










8:07
						 



							Ancient Greek Buildings | Definition, Types & Structures
					

							  










10:03
						 



							The Birth of Philosophy: The Presocratics
					

							  










17:33
						 



							Greek Phalanx Warfare Formation & Tactics
					

							  










6:40
						 



							Sparta Overview, History & Facts
					

							  










8:35
						 



							Herodotus in the Persian Wars | History & Contribution
					

							  










9:28
						 



							Slavery in Ancient Greece | History & Facts
					

							  










6:55
						 



							Aesculapius, the Greek God of Healing | Overview & Legacy
					



							Adeimantus of Corinth & the Battles of Artemisium & Salamis
					



							Alcibiades | Biography, Political Career & Death
					



							Alexander the Great | Biography, History & Facts
					



							Anaxagoras | Overview, Theory & Quotes
					



							Chthonic God | Definition & Examples
					



							Clytemnestra in Greek Mythology | Etymology, Background & Story
					



							Nike in Greek Mythology | Story, Facts & Symbol
					

							  










3:11
						 



							Oedipus Rex by Sophocles | Summary, Themes & Characters
					

							  










4:10
						 



							Oligarchy in Ancient Greece | Overview & History
					

							  










4:17
						 



							Red Figure Pottery: Technique & Style
					



							The Roman God Neptune | Mythology & Facts
					

							  










4:12
						 



							Pluto, Roman God of the Underworld | Overview & Mythology
					

							  










3:18
						 



							Socratic Dialogue | Definition, Structure & Examples
					

							  










5:43
						 



							Sophocles: Biography & Plays
					



							Poseidon, the Greek God | Mythology, Powers & Symbols
					

							  










2:55
						 



							Rhea, Goddess in Greek Mythology | Who was Rhea the Greek Goddess?
					

							  










5:03
						 



							Triglyph Definition, Origin & the Doric Corner Conflict
					



							Pythagoras | Biography, Facts & Impact
					




Next Lesson
Prometheus God in Greek Mythology | Story & Symbol








Ch 7. 
									
										AP World History - Hellenism and...










Ch 8. 
									
										AP World History - The Rise of the...










Ch 9. 
									
										AP World History - The Fall of the...










Ch 10. 
									
										AP World History - The Dark Ages: Help...










Ch 11. 
									
										AP World History - Early Middle Ages:...










Ch 12. 
									
										AP World History - The Medieval Warm...










Ch 13. 
									
										AP World History - The High Middle...










Ch 14. 
									
										AP World History - Asia, Africa &...










Ch 15. 
									
										AP World History - The Late Middle...










Ch 16. 
									
										AP World History - The Renaissance:...










Ch 17. 
									
										AP World History - The Age of...










Ch 18. 
									
										AP World History - The Reformation...










Ch 19. 
									
										AP World History - Imperialism: Help...










Ch 20. 
									
										AP World History - The Elizabethan Era:...










Ch 21. 
									
										AP World History - The Enlightenment:...










Ch 22. 
									
										AP World History - Political,...










Ch 23. 
									
										AP World History - Colonialism: Help...










Ch 24. 
									
										AP World History - World War I: Help...










Ch 25. 
									
										AP World History - World War II: Help...










Ch 26. 
									
										AP World History - The Cold War: Help &...










Ch 27. 
									
										AP World History - Major 20th Century...










Ch 28. 
									
										AP World History - A Globalized World -...










Ch 29. 
									
										Portions of the AP World History Exam:...










Ch 30. 
									
										AP World History Exam Essay Writing:...










Ch 31. 
									
										Essay Writing Your AP World History...










Ch 32. 
									
										Empires & Inventions of the Ancient...










Ch 33. 
									
										Inter-Continental Organizations










Ch 34. 
									
										The First Global Age










Ch 35. 
									
										World Wars & Unrest










Ch 36. 
									
										Global Conflict & Developments Since...










Ch 37. 
									
										Political Science Vocabulary &...












Pythagoras | Biography, Facts & Impact Related Study Materials




Related Topics






Browse by Courses
History 101: Western Civilization I
AP World History: Exam Prep
AP European History: Exam Prep
History 106: The Civil War and Reconstruction
World History: High School
AP European History: Help and Review
AP European History: Homework Help Resource
NY Regents Exam - US History and Government: Test Prep & Practice
NY Regents Exam - Global History and Geography: Test Prep & Practice
Middle School US History: Homework Help Resource
AP European History: Tutoring Solution
AP World History: Help and Review
SAT Subject Test US History: Practice and Study Guide
High School World History: Tutoring Solution
History 103: US History I






Browse by Lessons
Pythagoras Lesson for Kids: Biography & Facts
Atlas Mountains | Facts, Geography & Environmental Factors
Black Figure Pottery | Paintings, Techniques & Style
Euripides: Biography & Plays
Gilgamesh as Historical and Literary Figure
Ancient Etruscans and Rome: History, Art, Architecture & Religion
Marcus Licinius Crassus | Biography, Career & Death
Marcus Junius Brutus | Biography & Facts
Josiah Strong | Biography & Beliefs
Yasser Arafat | Life, PLO & Death
King Edward III of England | Biography, Children & Family Tree
Stono Rebellion of 1739 | History, Causes & Impact
Father Miguel Hidalgo | Biography, Facts & Death














				Create an account to start this course today
			

						  
							  Used by over 30 million students worldwide
						  
						  
                


				  Create an account
		













Like this lesson



Share




Explore our library of over 88,000 lessons


Search











Browse


						Browse by subject
					


College Courses

Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses



High School Courses

AP
Common Core
GED

High School
See All High School Courses



Other Courses

College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses













Upgrade to enroll
×


Upgrade to Premium to enroll in AP World History: Help and Review
Enrolling in a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams.




Track course progress




Take quizzes and exams




Earn certificates of completion



			You will also be able to:
			
Create a Goal
Create custom courses
Get your questions answered




Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!

			Upgrade Now
		
Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!











Download the app




























Plans

Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars® Solutions



About Us

Blog
Careers
Teach For Us
Press Center
Ambassador
Scholarships





Support

FAQ
Site Feedback



Download the app
























Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community








©  Copyright 2024 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		





Terms of Use  
Privacy Policy  
DMCA Notice  
ADA Compliance  
Honor Code For Students


















×








