



Quantum Physics: Niels Bohr: Explaining Bohr's Model of the Atom. Niels
(Neils) Bohr Biography, Quotes, Pictures





















Quantum Physics



Max PlanckLightQuanta



EinsteinPhotoelectricPhoton



de BroglieMatterWaves



SchrodingerWaveEquations



Max BornProbabilityWaves



HeisenbergUncertaintyPrinciple



Paul 
          DiracSpin ElectronEquation



Niels BohrCopenhagenInterpretation



FeynmanQED QuantumElectrodynamics



John Bell EPRInequalityLocality



David 
          Bohm:Pilot Wave(De Broglie) 



Milo WolffWave Struct.Matter (WSM) 


By SubjectQuantum Theory



ResonanceQuantaPhotons



ParticleWaveDuality



de BrogliePhase WavesEPR Non-Local

                             








Subjects


TruthRealityHome


SimpleSensibleScience


MetaphysicsSubstanceSpace


MathsPhysicsLogic


EinsteinTheoryRelativity


QuantumWavePhysics


CosmologySpaceUniverse


PhilosophyTruthWisdom


TheologyReligionGod


EvolutionEcologyNature


HealthNutritionHolistic


EducationTruthWisdom


PoliticsSocietyUtopia








 







Language
Afrika
Albania
Arabic
Belarus
Bulgaria
Catalan
Chinese S
Chinese T
Croatian
Czech
Danish
Dutch
English
Estonian
Filipino
Finnish
French
Galician
German
Greek
Hebrew
Hindi
Hungary
Iceland
Indon.
Irish
Italian
Japanese
Korean
Latvian
Lith.
Macedon
Malay
Maltese
Norway
Persian
Polish
Portugal
Romania
Russian
Serbian
Slovak
Sloven
Spanish
Swahili
Swedish
Thai
Turkish
Ukrain
Vietnam
Welsh
Yiddish




Follow @philosophytruth Tweet
  
Geoff







On 
      Truth & Reality
The Spherical Standing Wave Structure of Matter (WSM) 
      in Space
Quantum Physics: Niels Bohr
 The Wave Structure of Matter (WSM) and Standing
        Wave Interactions explains Discrete Energy States of Niels Bohr's Atomic
        Orbits / Model of the Atom.
        Replacing the 'Probability Waves' Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum
      Physics with Real Waves in Space. Biography, Quotes & Pictures.

The more success the quantum physics has,
        the sillier it looks. ... I think that a 'particle' must have a separate
        reality independent of the measurements. That is an electron has spin,
        location and so forth even when it is not being measured. I like to think
        that the moon is there even if I am not looking at it. ... God does not
        play dice with the cosmos. (Albert Einstein, On Quantum Physics)
Einstein, don't tell God what to do. (Niels
        Bohr in response to Einstein)
        Those who are not shocked when they first come across quantum physics
        cannot possibly have understood it. .... When it comes to atoms, language
        can be used only as in poetry. The poet, too, is not nearly so concerned
        with describing facts as with creating images.
        It is wrong to think that the task of physics is to find out how Nature
        is. Physics concerns what we say about Nature.
      (Niels Bohr, On Quantum Physics, 1885-1962)
Niels Bohr brainwashed a whole generation
        of physicists into believing that the problem (of the interpretation
        of quantum mechanics) had been solved fifty years ago. ( Murray Gell-Mann,
        Noble Prize acceptance speech, 1976)


 Introduction
          Niels Bohr - de Broglie
          Quantum Theory - Einstein
          Quantum Theory - Niels Bohr
          Quantum Theory - Niels
          Bohr Biography - Max Born
          Quantum Theory - Paul
          Dirac Quantum Theory - Werner
          Heisenberg Quantum Theory - Erwin
          Schrodinger Quantum Theory - Richard
          Feynman Quantum Theory - Top of Page

 Introduction
        to Niels Bohr
Niels Bohr profoundly influenced the evolution of Modern Physics (Quantum
        Theory), and I think history will show that his influence was very detrimental. 
The assumption that the waves of Quantum Theory were in no way real
        waves (as Schrodinger believed) has led to a terrible confusion in the
        sciences. By following Born's discovery that the square of Schrodinger's
        wave equations could be used to determine the probability of where the
        'particle' would be found, Bohr (and Heisenberg, Born, and now many others)
        have maintained the confusion of the particle wave duality of matter.
        (But in a more subtle form where the waves represent probabilities of
        where the particle will be found. i.e. Bohr's Copenhagen Doctrine - that
        Particles and Waves are both Incomplete descriptions of the world (which
        cannot be described) and Complement one another.
 However Einstein, Schrodinger, de Broglie, and many others believed
        that reality was not driven by chance, but was logically connected and
        that the laws of Nature could be sensibly understood.
The following quotes from Schrodinger can be clearly understood by the Wave
          Structure of Matter, which confirms that there are no separate
          and discrete particles, no subject and object that are not also part
          of one interconnected thing (Space and its Wave Motions).
      As Schrodinger writes;
What we observe as material bodies and forces are nothing
        but shapes and variations in the structure of space. Particles are just
        schaumkommen (appearances).The world is given to me only once, not one
        existing and one perceived. Subject and object are only one. The barrier
        between them cannot be said to have broken down as a result of recent
        experience in the physical sciences, for this barrier does not exist.
      (Erwin Schrodinger)
Because Schrodinger believed in real waves, he was never happy with
        Max Born's statistical / probability interpretation of the waves that
        became commonly accepted (and was actively promoted by Heisenberg and
        Bohr).
Let me say at the outset, that in this discourse, I am
        opposing not a few special statements of quantum mechanics held today
        (1950s), I am opposing as it were the whole of it, I am opposing its
        basic views that have been shaped 25 years ago, when Max Born put forward
        his probability interpretation, which was accepted by almost everybody.(Schrödinger
        E, The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge,
        CN, 1995).I don't like it, and I'm sorry I ever had anything to do with
        it. (Erwin Schrodinger talking about quantum mechanics)
The solution to their problems has unfortunately taken another 60 years
        to be realised (Wolff, 1986, Haselhurst, 1997). It is founded on the
        Wave Structure of Matter, and is quite simple once known.
        Below you will find a discussion of quotes on Quantum Theory from some
        of the most famous physicists of the time, who together created this
      wonderful and weird subject of Quantum Theory.
Geoff
          Haselhurst 


 Introduction
          Niels Bohr - de Broglie
          Quantum Theory - Einstein
          Quantum Theory - Niels Bohr
          Quantum Theory - Niels
          Bohr Biography - Max Born
          Quantum Theory - Paul
          Dirac Quantum Theory - Werner
          Heisenberg Quantum Theory - Erwin
          Schrodinger Quantum Theory - Richard
          Feynman Quantum Theory - Top of Page

Louis
        De Broglie on Quantum Physics
Determination of the stable motion of electrons in the
        atom introduces integers, and up to this point the only phenomena involving
        integers in physics were those of interference and of normal modes of
        vibration. This fact suggested to me the idea that electrons too could
        not be considered simply as particles, but that frequency (wave properties)
        must be assigned to them also. (Louis de Broglie, 1929, Nobel Prize Speech)
Thus I arrived at the following general idea which has
        guided my researches: for matter, just as much as for radiation, in particular
        light, we must introduce at one and the same time the corpuscle concept
        and the wave concept. In other words, in both cases we must assume the
        existence of corpuscles accompanied by waves. But corpuscles and waves
        cannot be independent, since, according to Bohr, they are complementary
        to each other; consequently it must be possible to establish a certain
        parallelism between the motion of a corpuscle and the propagation of
        the wave which is associated with it. (Louis de Broglie) 
If that turns out to be true, I'll quit physics. (Max
        Von Laue, Nobel Laureate Physics 1914, of de Broglie's thesis on electrons
        having wave properties)
De Broglie described himself as;
... having much more the state of mind of a pure theoretician
        than that of an experimenter or engineer, loving especially the general
        and philosophical view ... . 
The central question in de Broglie's life was whether the statistical
        nature of atomic physics reflects an ignorance of the underlying theory
        or whether statistics is all that can be known. For most of his life
        he believed the former although as a young researcher he had at first
        believed that the statistics hide our ignorance. Perhaps surprisingly,
        he returned to this view late in his life stating that;
... the statistical theories hide a completely determined
        and ascertainable reality behind variables which elude our experimental
        techniques.
This last statement is very important. It is the same position that
        Einstein supported. The Wave Structure of Matter confirms this view.
        Reality is necessarily connected (by Space and Spherical In & Out
        Waves that form matter) but we lack knowledge of all its interconnections,
        which gives rise to the statistical / probability aspects of reality
        as determined by Quantum Theory.
See also;
Physics:
        de Broglie, Louis - Wolff's Deduction of the de
        Broglie Wavelength as a Doppler Shift due to
      Relative Motion of two Spherical Standing Waves. 


 Introduction
          Niels Bohr - de Broglie
          Quantum Theory - Einstein
          Quantum Theory - Niels Bohr
          Quantum Theory - Niels
          Bohr Biography - Max Born
          Quantum Theory - Paul
          Dirac Quantum Theory - Werner
          Heisenberg Quantum Theory - Erwin
          Schrodinger Quantum Theory - Richard
          Feynman Quantum Theory - Top of Page

 Albert
        Einstein on Quantum Physics
According to the Wave Structure of Matter in Space, it is the conception
        of matter as discrete particles generating continuous forces in Space
        and Time that causes physics such problems. For Quantum Theory this error
        of too many existents (Space AND Time, Particles, Forces) without any
        clear connection, causes their problems with the statistical interpretations
        of reality. As Einstein writes;
The next step was taken by de Broglie. He asked himself
        how the discrete states could be understood by the aid of current concepts,
        and hit on a parallel with stationary (standing) waves, as for instance
        in the case of proper frequencies of organ pipes and strings in acoustics.
        (Albert Einstein, 1954)
Experiments on interference made with particle rays have
        given brilliant proof that the wave character of the phenomena of motion
        as assumed by the theory does, really, correspond to the facts. (Albert
        Einstein, 1954)
On the basis of quantum theory there was obtained a surprisingly
        good representation of an immense variety of facts which otherwise appeared
        entirely incomprehensible. But on one point, curiously enough, there
        was failure: it proved impossible to associate with these Schrodinger
        waves definite motions of the mass points - and that, after all, had
        been the original purpose of the whole construction. The difficulty appeared
        insurmountable until it was overcome by Born in a way as simple as it
        was unexpected. The de Broglie-Schrodinger wave fields were not to be
        interpreted as a mathematical description of how an event actually takes
        place in time and space, though, of course, they have reference to such
        an event. Rather they are a mathematical description of what we can actually
        know about the system. They serve only to make statistical statements
        and predictions of the results of all measurements which we can carry
        out upon the system. (Albert Einstein, 1940)
It seems to be clear, therefore, that Born's statistical
        interpretation of quantum theory is the only possible one. The wave function
        does not in any way describe a state which could be that of a single
        system; it relates rather to many systems, to an 'ensemble of systems'
        in the sense of statistical mechanics. (Albert Einstein, 1936)
All attempts to represent the particle and wave features
        displayed in the phenomena of light and matter, by direct recourse to
        a space time model, have so far ended in failure. And Heisenberg has
        convincingly shown, from an empirical point of view, that any decision
        as to a rigorously deterministic structure of nature is definitely ruled
        out, because of the atomistic structure of our experimental apparatus.
        (Albert Einstein, 1954)
 For the time being we have to admit that we do not possess
        any general theoretical basis for physics which can be regarded as its
        logical foundation. The field theory, so far, has failed in the molecular
        sphere. It is agreed on all hands that the only principle which could
        serve as a basis of quantum theory would be one that constituted a translation
        of the field theory into the scheme of quantum statistics. Whether this
        will actually come about in a satisfactory manner, nobody can venture
        to say.
        Some physicists, among them myself, cannot believe that we must abandon,
        actually and forever, the idea of direct representation of physical reality
        in space and time; or that we must accept the view that events in nature
        are analogous to a game of chance . Probably never before has a theory
        been evolved which has given a key to the interpretation and calculation
        of such a heterogeneous group of phenomena of experience as has quantum
        theory. In spite of this, however, I believe that the theory is apt to
        beguile us into error in our search for a uniform basis for physics,
        because, in my belief, it is an incomplete representation of real things,
        although it is the only one which can be built out of the fundamental
        concepts of force and material points (quantum corrections to classical
        mechanics). The incompleteness of the representation leads necessarily
        to the statistical nature (incompleteness) of the laws. (Albert Einstein,
      1954)
 As I have written before - it now seems obvious to me that Einstein's
        solution is found by rejecting particles AND continuous spherical forces
        AND Time - to describe reality from one thing, Space and the spherical
        wave motions that form matter. This solves so many of their problems
        that I will always find it strange that they never considered it! I also
        emphasise that there is a big difference between a necessarily connected
        universe (WSM), and a deterministic universe. It is necessary that One
        Thing existing, Space, must be Infinite, thus the system as a whole can
        never be determined (but it is necessarily connected). I see this as
        the reason for our limited free will.
      The Wave Structure of Matter agrees with Einstein,
The more success the quantum theory has, the sillier it
        looks. (Albert Einstein to Heinrich Zangger, May 20, 1912)
God does not play dice with the cosmos. (Albert Einstein)
I think that matter must have a separate reality independent
        of the measurements. That is an electron has spin, location and so forth
        even when it is not being measured. I like to think that the moon is
        there even if I am not looking at it. (Albert Einstein)


 Introduction
          Niels Bohr - de Broglie
          Quantum Theory - Einstein
          Quantum Theory - Niels Bohr
          Quantum Theory - Niels
          Bohr Biography - Max Born
          Quantum Theory - Paul
          Dirac Quantum Theory - Werner
          Heisenberg Quantum Theory - Erwin
          Schrodinger Quantum Theory - Richard
          Feynman Quantum Theory - Top of Page

 Niels
        Bohr on Quantum Physics
For a parallel to the lesson of atomic theory regarding
        the limited applicability of such customary idealisations, we must in
        fact turn to quite other branches of science, such as psychology, or
        even to that kind of epistemological problems with which already thinkers
        like BUDDHA and LAO TSE have been confronted, when trying to harmonize
        our position as spectators and actors in the great drama of existence.
        (Niels Bohr, Speech: Celebrazione del Secondo Centenario della Nascita
        di Luigi Galvani - Bologna - 18-21 Ottobre 1937)
It is true that Eastern Philosophy (and Mysticism) correctly realised
        the Dynamic Unity of
        Reality. The Wave Structure of Matter explains this interconnected
        activity of matter very simply.
Niels Bohr Quotes on Quantum Physics
The great extension of our experience in recent years
        has brought brought light to the insufficiency of our simple mechanical
        conceptions and, as a consequence, has shaken the foundation on which
        the customary interpretation of observation was based. (Niels
        Bohr, Atomic Physics and the Description of Nature, 1934)
I remember discussions with Bohr which went through many
        hours till very late at night an ended almost in despair; and when at
        the end of the discussion I went alone for a walk in the neighbouring
        park I repeated to myself again and again the question: Can nature possibly
        be so absurd as it seemed to us in these atomic experiments? (Heisenberg,
        Physics and Philosophy, 1963)
Isolated material particles are abstractions, their properties
        being definable and observable only through their interaction with other
        systems. (Niels Bohr, Atomic Physics and the Description
        of Nature, 1934)
The Wave Structure of Matter does not agree with Niels Bohr;
Einstein, don't tell God what to do. (Niels Bohr in response
        to Einstein)
Those who are not shocked when they first come across
        quantum mechanics cannot possibly have understood it. (Niels Bohr on
        Physics)
When it comes to atoms, language can be used only as in
        poetry. The poet, too, is not nearly so concerned with describing facts
        as with creating images.
        It is wrong to think that the task of physics is to find out how Nature
      is. Physics concerns what we say about Nature. (Niels Bohr, 1885-1962)
Niels Bohr brainwashed a whole generation of physicists
        into believing that the problem (of the interpretation of quantum mechanics)
        had been solved fifty years ago. (Murray Gell-Mann, Noble Prize acceptance
        speech, 1976)


 Introduction
          Niels Bohr - de Broglie
          Quantum Theory - Einstein
          Quantum Theory - Niels Bohr
          Quantum Theory - Niels
          Bohr Biography - Max Born
          Quantum Theory - Paul
          Dirac Quantum Theory - Werner
          Heisenberg Quantum Theory - Erwin
          Schrodinger Quantum Theory - Richard
          Feynman Quantum Theory - Top of Page

 Niels
        Bohr Biography: Life & Ideas
(1885 - 1962)
Niels Henrik David Bohr (October 7, 1885 – November 18, 1962)
        was a Danish physicist who made essential contributions to understanding
        atomic structure and quantum mechanics.
Niels Bohr's contributions to physics
Bohr's model of atomic structure. 
        The electron's orbital angular momentum is quantized; L=nh. 
        The theory that electrons travel in discrete orbits around the atom's
        nucleus, with the chemical properties of the element being largely determined
        by the number of electrons in the outer orbits. 
        The idea that an electron could drop from a higher-energy orbit to a
        lower one, emitting a photon (light quantum) of discrete energy (this
        became the basis for quantum theory). 
        The Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. 
        The principle of complementarity: that items could be separately analyzed
      as having several contradictory properties.
Relationship with Werner Heisenberg
Werner
          Heisenberg claimed in an interview after the war, when the author
          Robert Jungk was working on the book Brighter Than a Thousand Suns,
          that he had tried to establish a pact with Bohr such that scientists
          on neither side should help develop the atomic bomb. He also said that
          the German attempts were entirely focused on energy production, and
          that his circle of colleagues tried to keep it that way. Heisenberg
          nuanced his claims, though, and avoided implication that he and his
          colleagues had purposely sabotaged the bomb effort. However, this nuance
          was lost in Jungk's original publication of the book, which strongly
          implied that the German atomic bomb project was rendered purposely
          stillborn by Heisenberg.
When Bohr saw this depiction in the Danish translation of Jungk's book,
        he disagreed wholeheartedly. He said that Heisenberg had indeed let him
        know in Copenhagen that he was working on an atomic bomb project, and
        that he thought that Germany would win the war. He dismissed the idea
        of any pact as an after-the-fact construction. He drafted several letters
        to inform Heisenberg about this but never sent any of them. (https://www.nbi.dk/NBA/release.html)
Michael Frayn's play Copenhagen, which ran on Broadway for a time, explores
        what might have happened at the 1941 meeting between Heisenberg and Bohr.
        The truth of the historical event is still a matter of scholarly debate.
Niels
          Bohr Biography
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Niels_Bohr


 Introduction
          Niels Bohr - de Broglie
          Quantum Theory - Einstein
          Quantum Theory - Niels Bohr
          Quantum Theory - Niels
          Bohr Biography - Max Born
          Quantum Theory - Paul
          Dirac Quantum Theory - Werner
          Heisenberg Quantum Theory - Erwin
          Schrodinger Quantum Theory - Richard
          Feynman Quantum Theory - Top of Page

 Max
        Born on Quantum Physics
No concealed parameters can be introduced with the help
        of which the indeterministic description could be transformed into a
        deterministic one. Hence if a future theory should be deterministic,
        it cannot be a modification of the present one but must be essentially
        different. (M. Born, 1949)
This is correct, by moving from the Metaphysics of Space and Time (which
        also requires matter 'particles and forces', thus four separate existents)
        to the Metaphysics of Space and Motion and the Spherical Wave Structure
        of Matter, founded on One thing Space and its Properties as a Wave Medium.
        If they had realised this Wave Structure of Matter at the turn of last
        century, then we would not have had the problems of Quantum Theory that
        have clearly manifested over the past 80 years. And so the Wave Structure
        of Matter in Space obviously does not agree with the following comments
      from Born;
If God has made the world a perfect mechanism, He has
        at least conceded so much to our imperfect intellects that in order to
        predict little parts of it, we need not solve innumerable differential
        equations, but can use dice with fair success. (Max Born)
One obvious objection to the hypothesis of an elastic
        Aether (Space) arises from the necessity of ascribing to it the great
        rigidity it must have to account for the high velocity of Waves. Such
        a substance would necessarily offer resistance to the motion of heavenly
        bodies, particularly to that of planets. Astronomy has never detected
        departures from Newton's Laws of Motion that would point to such a resistance.
        (Max Born, 1924)
Born's 'Probability Waves' Interpretation of Quantum Physics (1928)
 (On Chance and Probability in a Necessarily Interconnected finite
        spherical Universe within a Non-Determined Infinite Space) 
 At the same time that the wave properties of matter were discovered,
        two further discoveries were made that also profoundly influenced (and
        confused) the future evolution of modern physics.
Firstly, Werner Heisenberg developed the uncertainty principle which
        tells us that we (the observer) can never exactly know both the position
        and momentum of a particle. As every observation requires an energy exchange
        (photon) to create the observed 'data', some energy (wave) state of the
        observed object has to be altered. Thus the observation has a discrete
        effect on what we measure. i.e. We change the experiment by observing
        it! (A large part of their problem though was to continue to assume the
        existence of discrete particles and thus to try to exactly locate both
        their position and motion, which is impossible as there is no discrete
        particle!)
        Further, because both the observed position and momentum of the particle
        can never be exactly known, theorists were left trying to determine the
      probability of where, for example, the 'particle' would be observed. 
Born (1928) was the first to discover (by chance and with no theoretical
        foundation) that the square of the quantum wave equations (which is actually
        the mass-energy density of space) could be used to predict the probability of where the
        particle would be found. Since it was impossible for both the waves and
        the particles to be real entities, it became customary to regard the
        waves as unreal probability waves and to maintain the belief in the 'real'
        particle. Unfortunately (profoundly) this maintained the belief in the
        particle/wave duality, in a new form where the 'quantum' scalar standing
        waves had become 'probability waves' for the 'real' particle. 
 Albert Einstein unfortunately agreed with this probability wave interpretation,
        as he believed in continuous force fields (not in waves or particles)
        thus to him it was sensible that the waves were not real, and were mere
        descriptions of probabilities. He writes;
 On the basis of quantum theory there was obtained a surprisingly
        good representation of an immense variety of facts which otherwise appeared
        entirely incomprehensible. But on one point, curiously enough, there
        was failure: it proved impossible to associate with these Schrodinger
        waves definite motions of the mass points -
        and that, after all, had been the original purpose of the whole construction.
        The difficulty appeared insurmountable until it was overcome by Born
        in a way as simple as it was unexpected. The de Broglie-Schrodinger wave
        fields were not to be interpreted as a mathematical description of how
        an event actually takes place in time and space, though, of course, they
        have reference to such an event. Rather they are a mathematical
        description of what we can actually know about the system. They
        serve only to make statistical statements and predictions of the results
        of all measurements which we can carry out upon the system. (Albert
        Einstein, 1940) 
 It seems to be clear, therefore, that Born's statistical
        interpretation of quantum theory is the only possible one. The wave function
        does not in any way describe a state which could be that of a single
        system; it relates rather to many systems, to an 'ensemble of
        systems' in the sense of statistical mechanics. (Albert
        Einstein, 1936)
 Albert Einstein is correct in one sense, mistaken in another. It is
        true that matter is intimately interconnected to all the other matter
        in the universe by the Spherical In and Out-Waves, something quantum
        theory discovered but never correctly understood.
        This has become known as quantum entanglement and relates to the famous
        experiment posed by Albert Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen (EPR) and when
        later technology allowed its experimental testing, it confirmed quantum
        theory's entanglement. Albert Einstein assumed this interconnectedness
        was due to the spherical spatially extended field structure of matter,
        instead, it is due to the interaction of the spherical spatially extended
        Standing Waves of matter with other matter's Wave-Centers distant in
        Space. Explaining this Standing Wave interaction of matter with other
        matter in the Space around it (action-at-a-distance) is largely the purpose
        of this Article and is one of the great powers of the Metaphysics of
      Space and Motion and the Spherical Wave Structure of Matter.
Nonetheless, Albert Einstein was very close to the truth. He realised
        that because matter is spherically spatially extended we must give up
        the idea of complete localization and knowledge of the 'particle' in
        a theoretical model. For the particle is nothing but the Wave-Center
        of a Spherical Standing Wave, and thus can never be isolated as an entity
        in itself, but is dependent on its interactions with all the other Matter
        in the Universe. And it is this lack of knowledge of the system as a
        whole that is the ultimate cause of the uncertainty and resultant probability
        inherent in Quantum Theory. 
 Thus the last and most successful creation of theoretical
        physics, namely quantum mechanics (QM), differs fundamentally from both
        Newton's mechanics, and Maxwell's e-m field. For the quantities which
        figure in QM's laws make no claim to describe physical reality itself,
        but only probabilities of the occurrence of a physical reality that we
        have in view. (Albert Einstein, 1931)
        I cannot but confess that I attach only a transitory importance to this
        interpretation. I still believe in the possibility of a model of reality
        - that is to say, of a theory which represents things themselves and
        not merely the probability of their occurrence. On the other hand, it
        seems to me certain that we must give up the idea of complete localization
        of the particle in a theoretical model. This seems to me the permanent
        upshot of Heisenberg's principle of uncertainty. (Albert Einstein,
      1934)
 Albert Einstein believed that Reality could be represented by spherical
        force fields, that reality was not founded on chance (as Bohr and Heisenberg
        argued) but on necessary connections between things (thus his comment
        'God does not play dice'!). He was largely correct, Matter is necessarily
        connected due to the Spherical Standing Wave Structure of Matter, but
        due to lack of knowledge of the system as a whole (the Universe), and
        the fact that it is impossible to determine an Infinite system (of which
        our finite spherical universe is a part - see Article on Cosmology),
        then this gives rise to the chance and uncertainty found in Quantum Theory.


 Introduction
          Niels Bohr - de Broglie
          Quantum Theory - Einstein
          Quantum Theory - Niels Bohr
          Quantum Theory - Niels
          Bohr Biography - Max Born
          Quantum Theory - Paul
          Dirac Quantum Theory - Werner
          Heisenberg Quantum Theory - Erwin
          Schrodinger Quantum Theory - Richard
          Feynman Quantum Theory - Top of Page

 Paul
        Dirac on Quantum Physics
Paul Dirac was a very smart sensible Physicist.
This statistical interpretation is now universally accepted
        as the best possible interpretation for quantum mechanics, even though
        many people are unhappy with it. People had got used to the determinism
        of the last century, where the present determines the future completely,
        and they now have to get used to a different situation in which the present
        only gives one information of a statistical nature about the future.
        A good many people find this unpleasant; Einstein has always objected
        to it. The way he expressed it was: "The good God does not play
        with dice". Schroedinger also did not like the statistical interpretation
        and tried for many years to find an interpretation involving determinism
        for his waves. But it was not successful as a general method. I must
        say that I also do not like indeterminism. I have to accept it because
        it is certainly the best that we can do with our present knowledge. One
        can always hope that there will be future developments which will lead
        to a drastically different theory from the present quantum mechanics
        and for which there may be a partial return of determinism. However,
        so long as one keeps to the present formalism, one has to have this indeterminism. 
        (P.A.M. Dirac, "The Development Of Quantum Mechanics" Conferenza
      Tenuta il 14 Aprile 1972, in Roma, Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, 1974)


 Introduction
          Niels Bohr - de Broglie
          Quantum Theory - Einstein
          Quantum Theory - Niels Bohr
          Quantum Theory - Niels
          Bohr Biography - Max Born
          Quantum Theory - Paul
          Dirac Quantum Theory - Werner
          Heisenberg Quantum Theory - Erwin
          Schrodinger Quantum Theory - Richard
          Feynman Quantum Theory - Top of Page

 Werner
        Heisenberg on Quantum Physics
The problems of the particle and thus the resulting paradox
        of the particle/wave duality, have caused great confusion within modern
        physics over the past seventy years, as Werner Heisenberg writes;
Light and matter are both single entities,
        and the apparent duality arises in the limitations of our language. (Heisenberg)
Both matter and radiation possess a remarkable duality
        of character, as they sometimes exhibit the properties of waves, at other
        times those of particles. Now it is obvious that a thing cannot be a
        form of wave motion and composed of particles at
        the same time - the two concepts are too different. (Heisenberg,
        1930)
 The solution of the difficulty is that the two mental
        pictures which experiment lead us to form - the one of the particles,
        the other of the waves - are both incomplete and have only the validity
        of analogies which are accurate only in limiting cases. (Heisenberg,
        1930)

        Light and matter are both single entities, and the apparent duality arises
        in the limitations of our language. 
        It is not surprising that our language should be incapable of describing
        the processes occurring within the atoms, for, as has been remarked,
        it was invented to describe the experiences of daily life, and these
        consist only of processes involving exceedingly large numbers of atoms.
        Furthermore, it is very difficult to modify our language so that it will
        be able to describe these atomic processes, for words can only describe
        things of which we can form mental pictures, and this ability, too, is
        a result of daily experience. Fortunately, mathematics is not subject
        to this limitation, and it has been possible to invent a mathematical
        scheme - the quantum theory - which seems entirely adequate for the treatment
        of atomic processes; for visualisation, however, we must content ourselves
        with two incomplete analogies - the wave picture and the corpuscular
      picture. (Heisenberg, 1930)
 The solution to this apparent paradox is to simply explain
        how the discrete particle properties of matter and light (quanta) are
        in fact caused by the Spherical Standing Wave Structure of Matter. 
See also;
Quantum
          Theory: Particle Wave Duality
      Quantum Theory: Light Quanta (Photons)


 Introduction
          Niels Bohr - de Broglie
          Quantum Theory - Einstein
          Quantum Theory - Niels Bohr
          Quantum Theory - Niels
          Bohr Biography - Max Born
          Quantum Theory - Paul
          Dirac Quantum Theory - Werner
          Heisenberg Quantum Theory - Erwin
          Schrodinger Quantum Theory - Richard
          Feynman Quantum Theory - Top of Page

 Erwin
        Schrodinger on Quantum Physics
These quotes from Schrodinger can be clearly understood by the Wave
        Structure of Matter, which confirms that there are no separate and discrete
        particles, no subject and object that are not also part of one interconnected
        thing (Space and its Wave Motions).
      As Schrodinger writes;
What we observe as material bodies and forces are nothing
        but shapes and variations in the structure of space. Particles are just
        schaumkommen (appearances).The world is given to me only once, not one
        existing and one perceived. Subject and object are only one. The barrier
        between them cannot be said to have broken down as a result of recent
        experience in the physical sciences, for this barrier does not exist.
      (Erwin Schrodinger)
Because Schrodinger believed in real waves, he was never happy with
        Max Born's statistical / probability interpretation of the waves that
        became commonly accepted (and was actively promoted by Heisenberg and
        Bohr).
Let me say at the outset, that in this discourse, I am
        opposing not a few special statements of quantum mechanics held today
        (1950s), I am opposing as it were the whole of it, I am opposing its
        basic views that have been shaped 25 years ago, when Max Born put forward
        his probability interpretation, which was accepted by almost everybody.(Schrödinger
        E, The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge,
        CN, 1995).I don't like it, and I'm sorry I ever had anything to do with
        it. (Erwin Schrodinger talking about quantum mechanics)
And I very strongly agree with Schrodinger (and greatly respect him)
        when he writes;
The scientist only imposes two things, namely truth and
        sincerity, imposes them upon himself and upon other scientists. (Schrodinger)


 Introduction
          Niels Bohr - de Broglie
          Quantum Theory - Einstein
          Quantum Theory - Niels Bohr
          Quantum Theory - Niels
          Bohr Biography - Max Born
          Quantum Theory - Paul
          Dirac Quantum Theory - Werner
          Heisenberg Quantum Theory - Erwin
          Schrodinger Quantum Theory - Richard
          Feynman Quantum Theory - Top of Page

 Richard
        Feynman on Quantum Physics
Unfortunately, due to this confusion of the particle wave duality of
        light and matter, and Born's statistical interpretation of Schrodinger's
        Wave Equations, Physics itself became uncertain and confused, as Feynman
        famously wrote;
I think it is safe to say that no one understands quantum
        mechanics. (Richard Feynman on Physics)The next question was - what makes
        planets go around the sun? At the time of Kepler some people answered
        this problem by saying that there were angels behind them beating their
        wings and pushing the planets around an orbit. As you will see, the answer
        is not very far from the truth. The only difference is that the angels
        sit in a different direction and their wings push inward. (Richard Feynman,
        Character Of Physical Law)
One does not, by knowing all the physical laws as we know
        them today, immediately obtain an understanding of anything much. (Richard
        Feynman, 1918-1988)
      I love only nature, and I hate mathematicians. (Richard Feynman 1918-1988)
... the more you see how strangely Nature behaves, the
        harder it is to make a model that explains how even the simplest phenomena
        actually work. So theoretical physics has given up on that. (Richard
        Feynman 1918-1988)
What I am going to tell you about is what we teach our
        physics students in the third or fourth year of graduate school... It
        is my task to convince you not to turn away because you don't understand
        it. You see my physics students don't understand it. ... That is because
        I don't understand it. Nobody does.
        (Feynman, Richard P. Nobel Lecture, 1966, 1918-1988, QED, The Strange
      Theory of Light and Matter)
See also;
Richard
          Feynman Quantum Theory / Quantum Electrodynamics

Concluding Remarks on Quantum Physics
Fritjof Capra got a lot right in his Tao of Physics due to his knowledge
        of Eastern Philosophy and Western Physics, thus his realisation of the
        Dynamic Unity of the Universe is important.
 A careful analysis of the process of observation in atomic
        physics has shown that the subatomic particles have no meaning as isolated
        entities, but can only be understood as interconnections between the
        preparation of an experiment and the subsequent measurement. Quantum
        theory thus reveals a basic oneness of the universe. The mathematical
        framework of quantum theory has passed countless successful tests and
        is now universally accepted as a consistent and accurate description
        of all atomic phenomena. The verbal interpretation, on the other hand,
        i.e. the metaphysics of quantum theory, is on far less solid ground.
        In fact, in more than forty years physicists have not been able to provide
        a clear metaphysical model. (Fritjof Capra, 1975)
Quantum Theory is founded on Wave Equations. Thus it is a strange thing,
        that for thousands of years we have imagined matter as discrete and separate
        particles and yet when the wave properties of matter where discovered
        they never thought to try a pure Spherical Standing Wave Structure of
        Matter. (i.e. Real waves in a Real Space). Instead Quantum Theory evolved
        along the path of the particle / wave duality of light and matter, and
        Born's statistical interpretations of the waves (which in hindsight was
        obviously going to lead to the end of a meaningful physics).
 While Einstein tried to solve these problems by correctly rejected
        the concept of the discrete and separate 'particle' (which required fields
        to connect them) his error was to try and create a pure unified field
        theory of matter as continuous spherical fields. Again, in hindsight
        he should have realised that the 'field' evolved from the 'particle'
        and by rejecting particles he should have also rejected the force fields
        (which were assumed to be generated by particles and act on other particles).
        Then he would have likely realised that the only other sensible solution
        was to see if the waves of Quantum Theory could explain the particle
        and the field. As Stephen Hawking writes (correctly);
But maybe that is our mistake: maybe there are no particle
        positions and velocities, but only waves. It is just that we try to fit
        the waves to our preconceived ideas of positions and velocities. The
        resulting mismatch is the cause of the apparent unpredictability. (Hawking,
        1988)
 And once we understand the Wave Structure of Matter, we find that we
        can quite easily understand how a Spherical Standing wave must form a
        pointlike 'particle' effect at its Wave-Center, while also existing across
        the universe due to its Spherical In and Out Waves, thus explaining Paul
        Davies comments;
The idea that something can be both a wave and a particle
        defies imagination, but the existence of this wave-particle duality is
        not in doubt. .. It is impossible to visualize a wave-particle, so don't
        try. ... The notion of a particle being everywhere at once is impossible
        to imagine. (Davies, 1985)
        The rules of clockwork might apply to familiar objects such as snooker
        balls, but when it comes to atoms, the rules are those of roulette. (Paul
      Davies, God and the New Physics)
The Spherical Standing Wave Structure of Matter in Space does solve
        many of the problems of Physics very simply and sensibly by providing
        the Metaphysical foundations for the fundamental laws of Nature (which
        found our knowledge of the real world).

Help Humanity
"You must be the change you wish to see in the world."
        (Mohandas Gandhi)
"When forced to summarize the general theory of relativity in one sentence: 
        Time and space and gravitation have no separate existence from matter. ... Physical objects are not in space, but these objects are spatially    extended. In this way the concept 'empty space' loses its meaning. ... The particle can only appear as a limited region in space in which 
        the field strength or the energy density are particularly high. ...
        The free, unhampered exchange of ideas and scientific conclusions is necessary for the sound development of science, as it is in all spheres 
        of cultural life. ... We must not conceal from ourselves that no improvement in the present depressing situation is possible without 
        a severe struggle; for the handful of those who are really determined to do something is minute in comparison with the mass of the lukewarm 
        and the misguided. ...
Humanity is going to need a substantially new way of thinking if it is to survive!" (Albert Einstein)

 
        Our world is in great trouble due to human behaviour founded on myths and customs that are causing the destruction of Nature and climate change. We can now deduce the most simple science theory of reality - the wave structure of matter in space. By understanding how we and everything around us are interconnected 
        in Space we can then deduce solutions to the fundamental problems of human knowledge in physics, philosophy, metaphysics, theology, education, health, evolution and ecology, politics and society.

        This is the profound new way of thinking that Einstein 
        realised, that we exist as spatially extended structures of the universe - the discrete and separate body an illusion. This simply confirms the 
        intuitions of the ancient philosophers and mystics.

Given the current censorship in physics / philosophy of science journals (based on the standard model of particle physics / big bang cosmology) the internet is the best hope for getting new knowledge 
        known to the world. But that depends on you, the people who care about science and society, realise the importance of truth and reality.

It is Easy to Help!
Just click on the Social Network links below, or copy a nice image or quote you like and share it. We have a wonderful collection of knowledge from the greatest minds in human history, so people will appreciate your contributions. In doing this you will help a new generation of scientists see that there is a simple sensible explanation of physical reality - the source of truth and wisdom, the only cure for the madness of man! Thanks! Geoff Haselhurst (Updated September, 2018)
A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die,  and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it. (Max Planck, 1920)


  
Tweet  Follow @philosophytruth


    
Geoff



  






Connect with Geoff Haselhurst at Facebook



"All that is necessary for evil to succeed is for good people to do nothing." (Edmund Burke)
"In a time of universal deceit - telling the truth is a revolutionary act."(George Orwell)
"Hell is Truth Seen Too Late."(Thomas Hobbes)







On  Truth & Reality
The Spherical Standing Wave Structure of Matter (WSM) in Space



          Deducing Most
          Simple Science
          Theory of Reality

          Metaphysics of
          Space, Dynamic
          Unity of Reality

          Maths Physics
          On Mathematics
          Logic & Reality 



          Albert Einstein's
          Special & General
          Relativity Theory

          Quantum Physics
          Wave Theory
          of Light & Matter


          WSM Cosmology
          Finite Universe
          & Infinite Space



          Philosophy
          Wisdom from
          Truth & Reality

          Theology
          God Religion
          Spirit Morality

          Life Evolution
          Ecology Nature
          Environment



          Human Health
          Nutrition Diet
          Medicine Drugs

          Education
          On Teaching
          Truth & Reality

          Politics Utopia
          True Democracy
          Political Science











SITE MAP: Metaphysics 
      - Physics 
      - Philosophy 
      - Theology 
      - Evolution
Legal Disclaimer and Privacy Policy


Copyright 1997 - 2018
      We support 'Fair Use' of these pages for Academic & Non Commercial use.You are welcome to use images and text, but please reference them with a link to relevant web page on this site. Thanks!





