




Richard Feynman | Nobel-prizewinning theoretical physicist | New Scientist
 








 





























 








Close



Advertisement






















 


Skip to content


Sign in




Search the website




















Events


Tours


Shop


Courses


Jobs




Subscribe now 

















Explore by section




News


Features


Newsletters


Podcasts


Video


Comment


Culture


Crosswords

|

This week's magazine







Explore by subject




Health


Space


Physics


Technology


Environment


Mind


Humans


Life


Mathematics


Chemistry


Earth


Society





Explore our products and services




Events


Tours


Shop


Courses


Jobs






Subscribe now 






Subscribe now
Richard Feynman11 May 1918 – 15 February 1988Nobel-prizewinning US theoretical physicist, educator and populariser of physicsBy Richard WebbFacebook / MetaTwitter / X iconWhatsAppLinkedinRedditEmailBettmann Archive/Getty ImagesRichard Feynman was a Nobel-prizewinning US theoretical physicist. Famed for his brilliant mind and mercurial personality, his main work was in quantum physics and particle physics, where he is particularly known for the Feynman diagram, a way of depicting particle processes graphically. But he was a prolific writer and thinker who also pioneered ideas in quantum computing and nanotechnology. In his last years, he gained widespread public fame as a prominent and outspoken member of the commission investigating the fatal Challenger Space Shuttle disaster.Feynman first made a scientific name for himself as a member of the Manhattan project to build the nuclear bombs that were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 at the end of the second world war.However, the scientific work for which Feynman is most noted came in the decades immediately following the second world war, when he was a key player in developing the theory of quantum electrodynamics, or QED. This is the quantum field theory of the electromagnetic force, and explains how charged particles such as electrons interact by exchanging photons of light. In 1965, Feynman shared the 1965 Nobel prize in physics with Julian Schwinger and Shin’ichirō Tomonaga for “fundamental work in quantum electrodynamics, with deep-ploughing consequences for the physics of elementary particles”.Feynman diagrams were part of this work. They provide a way to visually represent the complex interactions underlying quantum field theory, including “virtual” particles popping up out of nowhere from a quantum vacuum, without using the full complex mathematical machinery of the theory. The later Nobel prizewinner Frank Wilczek once said that many breakthroughs in particle physics, for example establishing how the Higgs boson, the particle that gives all other fundamental particles their mass, could be produced and observed, would have been “literally unthinkable” without Feynman diagrams.AdvertisementThe Great ExplainerFeynman was a tireless educator and populariser of physics across the board. The Feynman Lectures on Physics, which he originally gave to undergraduates at the California Institute of Technology in the 1960s, sealed his reputation as The Great Explainer, and remain a staple of many university physics courses today. His computational skill was matched by his love of the bongo drums, his pranks and his witty barbs. Ironically, perhaps his most famous quote – “If you think you understand quantum mechanics, you don’t understand quantum mechanics” – has no written source.Feynman’s first wife Arline died of tuberculosis in 1945. Following her death, and his qualms about the use of the nuclear weapons he had helped to develop, he experienced a deep depression. His relationship with women was generally complex, including two further marriages, bouts of womanising and the visiting of sex workers, which he detailed in two best-selling volumes of reminiscences, Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! (1985) and What Do You Care What Other People Think? (1988). For many, this has come to cast a shadow over his considerable and wide-ranging scientific achievements.His scientific expertise was most notoriously put on public display as an initially reluctant member of the Rogers Commission established to investigate the causes of the 1986 Challenger disaster, in which seven crew members of the space shuttle, including school teacher Christa McAuliffe, died when it exploded shortly after take-off.It was Feynman who established the disaster’s cause, a failure of a sealant ring that allowed hot gas from the craft’s rocket boosters to hit the huge external tanks containing hydrogen-oxygen fuel. NASA had said there was a 1 in 100,000 likelihood of this happening. Feynman did the experiments himself, memorably showing in a live televised hearing how the sealant rings wouldn’t be able to expand in the icy atmospheric conditions of a rocket take-off, making a risk of failure more like 1 in 100.Key factsFull name: Richard Phillips Feynman
 Born: 11 May 1918, Queens, New York City, US
 Died: 15 February 1988 (aged 69), Los Angeles, California, USUS theoretical physicist, educator and Nobel prize winner famed for his Feynman diagrams, providing visual representations of highly complex problems.
AdvertisementSign up to our weekly newsletterReceive a weekly dose of discovery in your inbox! 
            We'll also keep you up to date with New Scientist 
            events and special offers.Sign upMore on Richard Feynman
        Physics
    
                    How the weird and powerful pull of black holes made me a physicist
                CommentSubscriber-only
        Chemistry
    
                    Some metals actually grow more resilient when hot
                NewsFree
        Physics
    
                    X-ray laser fires most powerful pulse ever recorded
                NewsSubscriber-onlyRelated articles
        People in Science
    
                    Jocelyn Bell Burnell
                Free
        Question
    
                    How did the universe begin?
                Free
        Definition
    
                    Cosmic microwave background
                FreeAdvertisement





Download the app












Find us on social media




Instagram





Facebook





X / Twitter





Tiktok





LinkedIn







Subscriptions


Subscriber benefits


Gift


Student & graduate


Educational


Corporate






Support


Contact us


Help


About us


Advertise


Write for us






Tools


Events


Science Jobs


CoLab


Syndication


RSS feeds






Legal and privacy


Complaint policy


Privacy policy


Cookie policy


Terms & conditions



Cookie Settings











 © Copyright New Scientist Ltd. 

Back to the top










 



