



Richard Feynman: Books, Discoveries & Accomplishments | Study.com













































for Teachers
for Schools
for Working Scholars®
for College Credit


























Log In


Sign Up

Menu
					










									Plans
							



									Subjects
							





Art


Business


Computer Science


Education & Teaching


English


Health & Medicine


History


Humanities


Math


Psychology


Science


Social Science







							 
						



									Art
							



									Architecture 




									Art History 




									Design 




									Performing Arts 




									Visual Arts 






							 
						



									Business
							



									Accounting 




									Business Administration 




									Business Communication 




									Business Ethics 




									Business Intelligence 




									Business Law 




									Economics 




									Finance 




									Healthcare Administration 




									Human Resources 




									Information Technology 




									International Business 




									Operations Management 




									Real Estate 




									Sales & Marketing 






							 
						



									Computer Science
							



									Computer Engineering 




									Computer Programming 




									Cybersecurity 




									Data Science 




									Software 






							 
						



									Education & Teaching
							



									Education Law & Policy 




									Pedagogy & Teaching Strategies 




									Special & Specialized Education 




									Student Support in Education 




									Teaching English Language Learners 






							 
						



									English
							



									Grammar 




									Literature 




									Public Speaking 




									Reading 




									Vocabulary 




									Writing & Composition 






							 
						



									Health & Medicine
							



									Counseling & Therapy 




									Health 




									Medicine 




									Nursing 




									Nutrition 






							 
						



									History
							



									US History 




									World History 






							 
						



									Humanities
							



									Communication 




									Ethics 




									Foreign Languages 




									Philosophy 




									Religious Studies 






							 
						



									Math
							



									Algebra 




									Basic Math 




									Calculus 




									Geometry 




									Statistics 




									Trigonometry 






							 
						



									Psychology
							



									Clinical & Abnormal Psychology 




									Cognitive Science 




									Developmental Psychology 




									Educational Psychology 




									Organizational Psychology 




									Social Psychology 






							 
						



									Science
							



									Anatomy & Physiology 




									Astronomy 




									Biology 




									Chemistry 




									Earth Science 




									Engineering 




									Environmental Science 




									Physics 






							 
						



									Social Science
							



									Anthropology 




									Criminal Justice 




									Geography 




									Law 




									Linguistics 




									Political Science 




									Sociology 







									Courses
							





By Subject


By Education Level


Adult Education


Transferable Credit







							By Subject
						



									Arts 




									Business 




									Computer Science 




									Education & Teaching 




									English (ELA) 




									Foreign Language 




									Health & Medicine 




									History 




									Humanities 




									Math 




									Psychology 




									Science 




									Social Science 






							By Education Level
						



									Elementary School 




									Middle School 




									High School 




									College 




									Graduate and Post-Grad 







									Test Prep
							





Teacher Certification Exams


Nursing Exams


Allied Health & Medicine Exams


Real Estate Exams


All Test Prep







							 
						



									Teacher Certification Exams
							



									Praxis 




									FTCE 




									TExES 




									CSET & CBEST 




									More Teacher Certification Test Prep 






							 
						



									Nursing Exams
							



									NCLEX 




									HESI 




									More Nursing Test Prep 






							 
						



									Allied Health & Medicine Exams
							



									ASCP 




									CNA 




									CNS 




									More Medical Test Prep 






							 
						



									Real Estate Exams
							



									Real Estate Sales 




									Real Estate Brokers 




									Real Estate Appraisals 







									Teach
							





Teaching Resources and Curriculum


Skills Practice


Lesson Plans


Teacher Certification


Teacher Professional Development








									Tutoring
							





Math Tutoring


Science Tutoring


Business Tutoring


Humanities Tutoring







							 
						



									Math Tutoring
							



									Algebra  Tutoring




									Calculus  Tutoring




									Geometry  Tutoring




									Pre-calculus  Tutoring




									Statistics  Tutoring




									Trigonometry  Tutoring






							 
						



									Science Tutoring
							



									Biology  Tutoring




									Chemistry  Tutoring




									Physics  Tutoring






							 
						



									Business Tutoring
							



									Accounting  Tutoring




									Economics  Tutoring




									Finance  Tutoring






							 
						



									Humanities Tutoring
							



									History  Tutoring




									Literature  Tutoring




									Writing  Tutoring






Sign Up

























Copyright










 Science Courses
			
			/
			
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	

	
	
	
		
		
		
		
		
			
Significant Physicists Study Guide
Course




		Richard Feynman: Books, Discoveries & Accomplishments
	





Instructor

Betsy Chesnutt

Show bio
Betsy has a Ph.D. in biomedical engineering from the University of Memphis, M.S. from the University of Virginia, and B.S. from Mississippi State University. She has over 10 years of experience developing STEM curriculum and teaching physics, engineering, and biology. 





Cite this lesson









							Richard Feynman was a Nobel prize-winning physicist who was also famous for his sense of humor and ability to explain difficult concepts in an engaging way.  In this lesson, learn more about him and his accomplishments.
						
					





		Create an account
		




Table of ContentsWho Was Richard Feynman? Education and Early Work in Physics Manhattan Project Feynman Lectures on Physics Other Books by Feynman Challenger Disaster Lesson SummaryShow 





Who Was Richard Feynman?



The Nobel Prize-winning physicist Richard Feynman once said, ''I was born not knowing and have only had a little time to change that here and there.'' Despite revolutionizing the fields of quantum mechanics and quantum electrodynamics, writing the most popular physics textbook ever published, winning numerous awards, and being part of some of the twentieth century's most important scientific projects, Feynman truly believed that he still knew very little and was always seeking to learn something new. Even at the end of his life, he remained curious and excited about the secrets of the universe that would be uncovered in the future. He was truly a remarkable person and scientist who was one of the best known and most influential scientists of the twentieth century. 

   Richard Feynman (1918-1988) was one of the most influential scientists of the twentieth century 
 












								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account











									Lesson
							



									Quiz
								



									Course
								



						














	
	
							2.4K
							views






Education and Early Work in Physics



Richard Feynman graduated from Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1939 with a B.S. degree in physics. He wasn't always sure that he wanted to study physics; however, and when he started college, his first major was mathematics. As someone who had always been interested in practical things, he found math to be too abstract, so he switched to electrical engineering before finally settling on physics. As a physicist, he could use his mathematical abilities to unlock the mysteries of nature, and this was exactly what he would spend the rest of his life doing. 
After graduating from MIT, Feynman moved to Princeton and started working on a Ph.D. in physics. While at Princeton, Feynman became very interested in the emerging field of quantum mechanics, which studies the behavior of tiny subatomic particles. In the quantum world, very different rules apply than those we are used to, and Feynman found this incredibly fascinating. For his Ph.D. thesis, he developed an entirely new approach to understanding quantum mechanics. Feynman's method was based on understanding the interactions between particles, and this was quite different from the wave-based approach that was used by physicists at the time. Later, Feynman would refine this approach even further and come up with a new way to visually represent these particle interactions. He used a simple diagram consisting of different shapes and lines to represent the interactions of subatomic particles over space and time. These diagrams are still used extensively by physicists even today and are known as Feynman diagrams. 

   A Feynman diagram like this can be used to represent a complex interaction in a relatively simple, visual way 
 












								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account












Manhattan Project



While he was still a student at Princeton, Feynman was recruited to become part of the top secret Manhattan project, which was attempting to build the world's first nuclear weapon. After his graduation in 1942, he moved to New Mexico and worked at the Los Alamos national laboratory. Although he was proud to be chosen to be a member of this exclusive team, later in his life, Feynman would express some regrets about his role in the development of atomic weapons and said that he was very depressed after the destruction of Hiroshima. 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Feynman Lectures on Physics



After a few years working at Cornell University, Feynman moved to California where he became a professor of physics at the California Institute of Technology in 1960. At CalTech, it quickly became apparent that Feynman was not only an extraordinary physicist, but also a gifted teacher. CalTech had decided to overhaul the introductory physics courses offered to undergraduate students, and Feynman agreed to take on this project and even teach the courses himself one time. 
The lectures he gave during that course in 1961 and 1962 were incredibly popular both with students and other physicists and scientists. They were recorded and have been seen millions of times since then. You can even still watch the famous Feynman lectures today on the internet! The information Feynman presented in his lectures was collected into a textbook called The Feynman Lectures on Physics. Since it was first published in 1964, The Feynman Lectures has remained popular throughout the world and is still in print today. More than 1.5 million English copies have been sold, and it has also been translated into fifteen foreign languages and is read throughout the world. Because of his talent for making physics exciting, understandable, and relevant, Feynman was given the nickname 'The Great Explainer.' 

   These famous physics lectures were collected into a textbook first published in 1964. 
 












								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Other Books by Feynman



Richard Feynman was always at least as famous for his sense of humor and engaging personality as he was for his contributions to science, and he wrote several books that cemented both of these legacies. 
For his work in quantum electrodynamics, a field of physics which seeks to understand the interactions between light and matter, Feynman won a Nobel Prize in 1965. Later, he would take this notoriously complex subject and present it in a way that even non-scientists could understand in his book, Quantum Electrodynamics: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter. In 1985, Feynman published the autobiographical book Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman, which was a huge success. In this famous book, he recounted incidents from throughout his life that only added to his reputation as a very funny and outspoken person. Shortly after his death, a sequel, Why Do You Care What Other People Think, was published in 1988. 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Challenger Disaster



Feynman was diagnosed with abdominal cancer in 1978, but he continued working for ten more years until his death in 1988. In 1986, he would make one more important contribution to science. In the winter of 1986, the Challenger space shuttle exploded immediately after takeoff, and NASA could not figure out the cause of the crash. As one of the world's foremost scientists, they turned to Feynman to help them. He was able to determine that the space shuttle explosion was caused by a faulty O-ring that would crack at low temperatures. It was very cold the morning the Challenger was launched and no one had thought to check if the material of the O-ring was made to be stable below freezing. 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Lesson Summary



Richard Feynman lived from 1918-1988 and was one of the most influential scientists of his time. He revolutionized the fields of quantum mechanics and quantum electrodynamics, and received a Nobel prize for his work in these fields in 1965. He also developed a new type of diagram, which is now called a Feynman diagram, to represent interactions between subatomic particles. In addition, he was a member of the Manhattan project and discovered the cause of the Challenger explosion. He wrote many books, including a physics textbook that is still extremely popular worldwide and was called 'The Great Explainer' for his ability to convey complex ideas in an engaging and understandable way.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account












Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?


				I am a student
			

 I am a teacher
			



Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 30 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In

 Back
					


Resources created by teachers for teachers
Over 30,000 video lessons
		& teaching resources‐all
		in one place.
	






Video lessons





Quizzes & Worksheets





Classroom Integration





Lesson Plans



I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues. It’s like a teacher waved a magic wand and did the work for me. I feel like it’s a lifeline.



			Jennifer B.
		

				Teacher
				
				
			

































    
    
		Try it now
	




 Back
	











		Start today. Try it now
		








Significant Physicists Study Guide


4 chapters |
				
					
					
						75 lessons
						
					
				
			






Ch 1. 
									
										Contemporary Physicists










Ch 2. 
              Early 20th Century Physicists






							Leo Szilard: Biography & the Atomic Bomb
					



							Louis de Broglie | Biography, Theories & Experiments
					



							Gustav Ludwig Hertz: Biography, Inventions & Contributions
					



							Max Delbruck: Biography & Quotes
					



							Max Delbruck: Accomplishments & Contributions to DNA
					



							Albert Abraham Michelson | Biography, Career & Contributions
					



							Arnold Sommerfeld | Biography, Career & Contributions
					



							C.V. Raman: Biography & Inventions
					

							  










5:32
						 



							Enrico Fermi | Biography & Inventions
					



							Erwin Schrodinger | Discover, Equation & Example
					



							George Gamow: Biography, Facts & Big Bang Theory
					



							Hendrik Lorentz | Nobel Prize, Books & Theory
					



							Homi Jehangir Bhabha: Biography, Inventions & Achievements
					

							  










5:21
						 



							Lise Meitner | Biography, Nuclear Fission Discovery & Legacy
					



							Marguerite Perey | Biography, Discovery & Education
					



							Max Born: Biography & Quotes
					



							Max Born & the Birth of Quantum Mechanics
					



							Max von Laue: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Max von Laue: Crystallography & X-Ray Diffraction
					



							Paul Dirac: Biography & Quotes
					



							Paul Dirac | Quantum Mechanics & Equation
					



							Richard Feynman: Biography & Quotes
					



							Richard Feynman: Books, Discoveries & Accomplishments
					




Next Lesson
Werner Heisenberg: Biography, Facts & Quotes




							Werner Heisenberg | Experiment, Discovery & Achievements
					



							Wolfgang Ernst Pauli: Biography & Quotes
					



							Wolfgang Pauli | Biography, Contributions & Nobel Prize
					



							Maria Goeppert-Mayer: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Maria Goeppert-Mayer & the Nuclear Shell Model
					



							Maria Goeppert-Mayer: Contributions & Accomplishments
					



							Katharine Burr Blodgett: Biography, Inventions & Contributions
					







Ch 3. 
									
										Late 20th Century Physicists










Ch 4. 
									
										Pre-20th Century Physicists












Richard Feynman: Books, Discoveries & Accomplishments Related Study Materials




Related Topics






Browse by Courses
College Chemistry: Tutoring Solution
High School Chemistry: Help and Review
Physical Science: Help and Review
Middle School Physical Science: Help and Review
Middle School Physical Science: Tutoring Solution
High School Physics: Homework Help Resource
High School Physics: Help and Review
Middle School Earth Science: Tutoring Solution
Middle School Life Science: Help and Review
High School Chemistry: Tutoring Solution
Human Anatomy & Physiology: Help and Review
High School Biology: Homework Help Resource
Microbiology: Help and Review
Pathophysiology: Certificate Program
UExcel Earth Science: Study Guide & Test Prep






Browse by Lessons
Behavior Chart Ideas for Elementary School
Richard Feynman: Biography & Quotes
Diagenesis in Geology | Processes, Stages & Forms
Anatexis & Palingenesis: Definitions & Examples
Microfossils: Definition, Uses & Importance
Microfossils Definition, Importance & Examples
Alluvium Properties, Formation & Composition
Permafrost | Definition, Location & Characteristics
Continental Rise | Definition, Formation & Characteristics
Natural Bridge Definition, Formation & Examples
Drought | History, Types & Causes
Absolute Age Dating | Importance, Types & Examples
Reflection in Physics Project Ideas
Light-Year | Definition, Length & Measurement
Space Missions: Exploration, Discoveries, & Ongoing Studies














				Create an account to start this course today
			

						  
							  Used by over 30 million students worldwide
						  
						  
                


				  Create an account
		













Like this lesson



Share




Explore our library of over 88,000 lessons


Search











Browse


						Browse by subject
					


College Courses

Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses



High School Courses

AP
Common Core
GED

High School
See All High School Courses



Other Courses

College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses













Upgrade to enroll
×


Upgrade to Premium to enroll in Significant Physicists Study Guide
Enrolling in a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams.




Track course progress




Take quizzes and exams




Earn certificates of completion



			You will also be able to:
			
Create a Goal
Create custom courses
Get your questions answered




Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!

			Upgrade Now
		
Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!











Download the app




























Plans

Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars® Solutions



About Us

Blog
Careers
Teach For Us
Press Center
Ambassador
Scholarships





Support

FAQ
Site Feedback



Download the app
























Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community








©  Copyright 2024 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		





Terms of Use  
Privacy Policy  
DMCA Notice  
ADA Compliance  
Honor Code For Students


















×








