



Richard Feynman: Biography & Quotes | Study.com













































for Teachers
for Schools
for Working Scholars®
for College Credit


























Log In


Sign Up

Menu
					










									Plans
							



									Subjects
							





Art


Business


Computer Science


Education & Teaching


English


Health & Medicine


History


Humanities


Math


Psychology


Science


Social Science







							 
						



									Art
							



									Architecture 




									Art History 




									Design 




									Performing Arts 




									Visual Arts 






							 
						



									Business
							



									Accounting 




									Business Administration 




									Business Communication 




									Business Ethics 




									Business Intelligence 




									Business Law 




									Economics 




									Finance 




									Healthcare Administration 




									Human Resources 




									Information Technology 




									International Business 




									Operations Management 




									Real Estate 




									Sales & Marketing 






							 
						



									Computer Science
							



									Computer Engineering 




									Computer Programming 




									Cybersecurity 




									Data Science 




									Software 






							 
						



									Education & Teaching
							



									Education Law & Policy 




									Pedagogy & Teaching Strategies 




									Special & Specialized Education 




									Student Support in Education 




									Teaching English Language Learners 






							 
						



									English
							



									Grammar 




									Literature 




									Public Speaking 




									Reading 




									Vocabulary 




									Writing & Composition 






							 
						



									Health & Medicine
							



									Counseling & Therapy 




									Health 




									Medicine 




									Nursing 




									Nutrition 






							 
						



									History
							



									US History 




									World History 






							 
						



									Humanities
							



									Communication 




									Ethics 




									Foreign Languages 




									Philosophy 




									Religious Studies 






							 
						



									Math
							



									Algebra 




									Basic Math 




									Calculus 




									Geometry 




									Statistics 




									Trigonometry 






							 
						



									Psychology
							



									Clinical & Abnormal Psychology 




									Cognitive Science 




									Developmental Psychology 




									Educational Psychology 




									Organizational Psychology 




									Social Psychology 






							 
						



									Science
							



									Anatomy & Physiology 




									Astronomy 




									Biology 




									Chemistry 




									Earth Science 




									Engineering 




									Environmental Science 




									Physics 






							 
						



									Social Science
							



									Anthropology 




									Criminal Justice 




									Geography 




									Law 




									Linguistics 




									Political Science 




									Sociology 







									Courses
							





By Subject


By Education Level


Adult Education


Transferable Credit







							By Subject
						



									Arts 




									Business 




									Computer Science 




									Education & Teaching 




									English (ELA) 




									Foreign Language 




									Health & Medicine 




									History 




									Humanities 




									Math 




									Psychology 




									Science 




									Social Science 






							By Education Level
						



									Elementary School 




									Middle School 




									High School 




									College 




									Graduate and Post-Grad 







									Test Prep
							





Teacher Certification Exams


Nursing Exams


Allied Health & Medicine Exams


Real Estate Exams


All Test Prep







							 
						



									Teacher Certification Exams
							



									Praxis 




									FTCE 




									TExES 




									CSET & CBEST 




									More Teacher Certification Test Prep 






							 
						



									Nursing Exams
							



									NCLEX 




									HESI 




									More Nursing Test Prep 






							 
						



									Allied Health & Medicine Exams
							



									ASCP 




									CNA 




									CNS 




									More Medical Test Prep 






							 
						



									Real Estate Exams
							



									Real Estate Sales 




									Real Estate Brokers 




									Real Estate Appraisals 







									Teach
							





Teaching Resources and Curriculum


Skills Practice


Lesson Plans


Teacher Certification


Teacher Professional Development








									Tutoring
							





Math Tutoring


Science Tutoring


Business Tutoring


Humanities Tutoring







							 
						



									Math Tutoring
							



									Algebra  Tutoring




									Calculus  Tutoring




									Geometry  Tutoring




									Pre-calculus  Tutoring




									Statistics  Tutoring




									Trigonometry  Tutoring






							 
						



									Science Tutoring
							



									Biology  Tutoring




									Chemistry  Tutoring




									Physics  Tutoring






							 
						



									Business Tutoring
							



									Accounting  Tutoring




									Economics  Tutoring




									Finance  Tutoring






							 
						



									Humanities Tutoring
							



									History  Tutoring




									Literature  Tutoring




									Writing  Tutoring






Sign Up

























Copyright










 Science Courses
			
			/
			
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
	

	
	
	
		
		
		
		
		
			
Significant Physicists Study Guide
Course




		Richard Feynman: Biography & Quotes
	





Instructor

Betsy Chesnutt

Show bio
Betsy has a Ph.D. in biomedical engineering from the University of Memphis, M.S. from the University of Virginia, and B.S. from Mississippi State University. She has over 10 years of experience developing STEM curriculum and teaching physics, engineering, and biology. 





Cite this lesson









							Richard Feynman was a famous physicist and teacher who was known throughout the world for his contributions to science and his engaging personality.  In this lesson, learn about his life and some of his contributions to science.
						
					





		Create an account
		




Table of ContentsWho was Richard Feynman? Early Life Education Personal Life Later Life and Death Lesson SummaryShow 





Who was Richard Feynman?



In 1918, a boy was born in New York who would grow up to play a large role in many of the most important scientific and technological discoveries of the twentieth century. His name was Richard Feynmann, and early in his career he played a critical role in the development of the world's first atomic bomb as a member of the Manhattan project. 

   Richard Feynman during the time he was working on the Manhattan Project in the 1940s 
 





He also re-imagined quantum mechanics and electrodynamics, developing ways to represent these complex subjects in much more intuitive and understandable terms. He received a Nobel Prize for this ground breaking work in 1965. Near the end of his life, he discovered what caused the Challenger explosion when no other scientists at NASA could explain what had happened. 


   In 1986, the space shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after take off. Richard Feynman determined the cause of the explosion. 
 





In addition to being a phenomenal physicist, Feynman is also remembered as one of the world's best teachers, writers, and science communicators. He was a professor at the California Institute of Technology for many years, and his lectures on physics are still watched and read by millions of people today. Feynman was known for his ability to communicate science to the public in a way that made it seem approachable and even entertaining, earning him the nickname, 'The Great Explainer'. Despite making so many contributions to physics throughout his life, Feynman remained humble about his abilities, famously saying, 'I was born not knowing and have only had a little time to change that here and there.' 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account











									Lesson
							



									Quiz
								



									Course
								



						














	
	
							1.4K
							views






Early Life



Richard Feynman was born on May 11, 1918 in Queens, New York to two Russian Jewish immigrants, Lucille and Melville Feynman. When he was a child, Feynman's father always encouraged him to question everything and learn something new whenever he could. This attitude would stick with him throughout his life, and combined with the sense of humor he inherited from his mother, would come to be the defining characteristic of his personality. Feynman had one sister, Joan, who was nine years younger than him. They were similar in many ways and remained close throughout their lives. Both became physicists, although Joan studied astrophysics, while Richard chose to focus his attention primarily on quantum mechanics, which is the study of the very tiny particles that make up the subatomic world. 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account












Education



Feynman graduated from Far Rockaway High School in Queens, and while still a high school student, he taught himself trigonometry, advanced algebra, analytic geometry and calculus. He always excelled in subjects related to math and science, and he won the New York University Math Championship for high school students. However, he did not have much respect for other subjects or the students who were interested in them, saying of his fellow students who chose to study the humanities, 'The theoretical broadening which comes from having many humanities subjects on the campus is offset by the general dopiness of the people who study these things.' 
After graduation, Feynman enrolled in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and planned to pursue a degree in mathematics. After a few semesters, however, he switched to electrical engineering because he felt mathematics was too abstract for him. Finding electrical engineering to be a bit too far the other way, he finally settled on physics. Feynman loved physics because he felt like he was studying the nature of reality itself, and there was nothing more important to him than that. Of his love for science and physics, he said, 'The imagination of nature is far, far greater than the imagination of man.' All his life, he wanted to understand at least a little of the nature's imagination. He graduated from MIT in 1939 and applied to the graduate physics program at Princeton. On his entrance exams, he made a perfect score in physics, and scored exceptionally well in mathematics as well. As was true throughout his educational career, however, he did much worse on the English and history sections! He was admitted anyway, and did exceptionally well, graduating with a Ph.D. in physics in 1942. 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Personal Life



Feynman married his high school sweetheart, Arline Greenbaum, immediately after receiving his Ph.D from Princeton. She had already been diagnosed with tuberculosis, which was almost universally fatal at the time, but he wanted to marry her anyway and take care of her as well as he could. In 1943, Feynman was recruited to be part of the Manhattan project, which was working to build a nuclear bomb at the top secret Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico. He went, taking his sick wife with him and paying for her to live in a nearby hospital in Albuquerque. She died there in 1945, with Feynman by her side. He was later married to Mary Bell from 1952-1956 and to Gweneth Howarth from 1960 until his death in 1988. He and Gweneth had two children together, Carl and Michelle. 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Later Life and Death



In 1978, Feynman was diagnosed with a rare form of abdominal cancer. He underwent several surgeries over the next ten years while continuing to work. In 1986, he led a team that discovered the cause of the Challenger explosion, which turned out to be due to faulty O-rings that would crack at low temperatures. Shortly after this, new tumors were discovered, and Feynman died in 1988. He was 69 years old. 






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account







Lesson Summary



Throughout his life, Richard Feynman excelled as a scientist, teacher, and writer. His research focused primarily on quantum mechanics, which is the study of the behavior of tiny subatomic particles. He also worked on the Manhattan project and discovered the cause of the Challenger disaster in 1986. He was one of the world's best teachers and science communicators as well, and his famous lectures on physics are still watched by millions today.






								
									
									
										To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
									
								
								
								
Create your account












Register to view this lesson
Are you a student or a teacher?


				I am a student
			

 I am a teacher
			



Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 30 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In

 Back
					


Resources created by teachers for teachers
Over 30,000 video lessons
		& teaching resources‐all
		in one place.
	






Video lessons





Quizzes & Worksheets





Classroom Integration





Lesson Plans



I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues. It’s like a teacher waved a magic wand and did the work for me. I feel like it’s a lifeline.



			Jennifer B.
		

				Teacher
				
				
			

































    
    
		Try it now
	




 Back
	











		Start today. Try it now
		








Significant Physicists Study Guide


4 chapters |
				
					
					
						75 lessons
						
					
				
			






Ch 1. 
									
										Contemporary Physicists










Ch 2. 
              Early 20th Century Physicists






							Leo Szilard: Biography & the Atomic Bomb
					



							Louis de Broglie | Biography, Theories & Experiments
					



							Gustav Ludwig Hertz: Biography, Inventions & Contributions
					



							Max Delbruck: Biography & Quotes
					



							Max Delbruck: Accomplishments & Contributions to DNA
					



							Albert Abraham Michelson | Biography, Career & Contributions
					



							Arnold Sommerfeld | Biography, Career & Contributions
					



							C.V. Raman: Biography & Inventions
					

							  










5:32
						 



							Enrico Fermi | Biography & Inventions
					



							Erwin Schrodinger | Discover, Equation & Example
					



							George Gamow: Biography, Facts & Big Bang Theory
					



							Hendrik Lorentz | Nobel Prize, Books & Theory
					



							Homi Jehangir Bhabha: Biography, Inventions & Achievements
					

							  










5:21
						 



							Lise Meitner | Biography, Nuclear Fission Discovery & Legacy
					



							Marguerite Perey | Biography, Discovery & Education
					



							Max Born: Biography & Quotes
					



							Max Born & the Birth of Quantum Mechanics
					



							Max von Laue: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Max von Laue: Crystallography & X-Ray Diffraction
					



							Paul Dirac: Biography & Quotes
					



							Paul Dirac | Quantum Mechanics & Equation
					



							Richard Feynman: Biography & Quotes
					




Next Lesson
Richard Feynman: Books, Discoveries & Accomplishments




							Werner Heisenberg: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Werner Heisenberg | Experiment, Discovery & Achievements
					



							Wolfgang Ernst Pauli: Biography & Quotes
					



							Wolfgang Pauli | Biography, Contributions & Nobel Prize
					



							Maria Goeppert-Mayer: Biography, Facts & Quotes
					



							Maria Goeppert-Mayer & the Nuclear Shell Model
					



							Maria Goeppert-Mayer: Contributions & Accomplishments
					



							Katharine Burr Blodgett: Biography, Inventions & Contributions
					







Ch 3. 
									
										Late 20th Century Physicists










Ch 4. 
									
										Pre-20th Century Physicists












Richard Feynman: Biography & Quotes Related Study Materials




Related Topics






Browse by Courses
General Chemistry for Teachers: Professional Development
Environment & Humanity for Teachers: Professional Development
Physical Geology for Teachers: Professional Development
Principles of Health for Teachers: Professional Development
UExcel Physics: Study Guide & Test Prep
Physical Geology Textbook
Biology 101 Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
Fundamentals of Nursing Syllabus Resource & Lesson Plans
Middle School Earth Science Curriculum Resource & Lesson Plans
Physical Science Curriculum Resource & Lesson Plans
Earth Science: High School
Holt McDougal Physics: Online Textbook Help
Physical Science for Teachers: Professional Development
Gerontology for Teachers: Professional Development
Natural Sciences for Teachers: Professional Development






Browse by Lessons
Richard Feynman: Books, Discoveries & Accomplishments
Behavior Chart Ideas for Elementary School
Cesium Definition, Facts & Properties
Factors Affecting Energy Flow in Earth's Systems
Nuclear Fuels: Definition, Characteristics & Examples
Macroevolution Overview, Evidences & Examples
Recombinant DNA Definition, Applications & Examples
Alpha Carbon Overview, Acidity & Reactions
Photosynthesis Definition, Process & Equation
Sticky Ends of DNA | Definition, Concept & Examples
Phylogenetic Tree | Definition, Types & Diagram
Introns | Definition, Functions & Sequence
RNA Polymerase II | Overview, Function & Structure
What is Lichen Planus? - Causes, Symptoms & Treatment
Crustacean Digestive System














				Create an account to start this course today
			

						  
							  Used by over 30 million students worldwide
						  
						  
                


				  Create an account
		













Like this lesson



Share




Explore our library of over 88,000 lessons


Search











Browse


						Browse by subject
					


College Courses

Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses



High School Courses

AP
Common Core
GED

High School
See All High School Courses



Other Courses

College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses













Upgrade to enroll
×


Upgrade to Premium to enroll in Significant Physicists Study Guide
Enrolling in a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams.




Track course progress




Take quizzes and exams




Earn certificates of completion



			You will also be able to:
			
Create a Goal
Create custom courses
Get your questions answered




Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!

			Upgrade Now
		
Upgrade to Premium to add all these features to your account!











Download the app




























Plans

Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars® Solutions



About Us

Blog
Careers
Teach For Us
Press Center
Ambassador
Scholarships





Support

FAQ
Site Feedback



Download the app
























Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community








©  Copyright 2024 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		





Terms of Use  
Privacy Policy  
DMCA Notice  
ADA Compliance  
Honor Code For Students


















×








