





Richard Feynman - Magnet Academy




































Skip to main content










The National MagLab is funded by the National Science Foundation and the State of Florida.


































          Menu
          




  Watch & Play



 Watch & Play
                See the science at play in these electrifying demonstrations and animations that illuminate the invisible electromagnetic forces. Or have your own fun with puzzles, games and a collection of interactive tutorials.




 Interactive Tutorials
These demonstrations about laws and tools associated with electricity and magnetism allow you to adjust variables at and to visualize invisible forces — which makes them almost better than the real thing.


 See-Thru Science
Seeing is believing. In these animations, we show you what electricity and magnetism might look like if they weren't invisible.


 Game & Quizzes
Learn about electricity and magnetism — and have some fun while you're at it!


 Science Demos
How do Maglev trains work? What are comets made of? How do bugs walk on water? This section demonstrates these and other concepts related to magnetism, electricity and other areas of science.







 Read Science Stories 



  Read Science Stories 
                Whether you prefer science stories that are short & sweet, long & detailed, or in graphic form, these stories spell out the basics of electricity and magnetism and the exciting discoveries that magnets enable in easy-to-understand language.




  Science simplified 
Whether you prefer your science short & sweet or long & detailed, we spell it out for you here in easy-to-understand language.
 Comic Collection
Read fun science stories told in comic strip style.
 The Art of Science 
There is beauty and art in science. Gaze on these stories of discoveries that could be featured on museum walls instead of scientific journals.


 Left Fields
Explore these surprising, unconventional and sometimes downright strange stories about high magnetic field research.
 Science Step-by-Step 
These special science graphics explain science stories in digestible steps and include optional detours for readers wanting more background to customize your reading journey.







Explore History



  Explore History
                    Electricity and magnetism discoveries span the centuries. Peruse the people, products and places related to electricity & magnetism from across space and time.




 Pioneers
Get to know these pioneers who went down in history for their groundbreaking work, including scientists behind common terms such as Amp, Celsius, Kelvin, hertz and tesla.


  Museum
From the world's first compass to the magnetic force microscope and beyond, explore a variety of instruments, tools and machines throughout history.


  Timeline
Our timeline takes you through the highlights of electricity and magnetism and across the centuries.


  Places
Take a field trip to these high magnetic field landmarks around the globe.







Try This at Home



 Try This at Home
                  Science can happen anywhere! Try these hands-on science activities at home, school, club, or wherever you might find yourself! They’re easy, fun and can be done with stuff you have around the house.




Activity Books
Atomic Ornament
Brain Cerebrum Hat
Candy Neuron
Crystal Growing
DIY Kaleidoscope
Drawing Magnetic Field Lines
Fill-in Fractal


Make a Compass Activity
Makeshift Magnets
Making Electromagnets
Making Ferrofluids
Möbius Strip
See Iron in Food
Shapeshifting Slime







 Plan a Lesson



   Plan a Lesson
          Looking for a lesson plan for science class or to incorporate science concepts into other subjects? These lessons plans offer detailed directions for K12 teachers to conduct hands-on lessons and align with next generation science standards. 


Compasses
Demagnetizing
Electric Motors
Electromagnets
Magnet Exploration


Magnetic Putty
Magnetizing and Unmagnetizing
Making a Circuit
Pancake Particles
Plotting Electric Field Lines





















 Richard Feynman
Theoretical physicist Richard Phillips Feynman greatly simplified the way in which the interactions of particles could be described through his introduction of the diagrams that now bear his name (Feynman diagrams) and was a co-recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1965 for his reworking of quantum electrodynamics (QED).









  






He shared the prize with Sin-Itiro Tomonaga and Julian Schwinger. Feynman is often remembered as much for his offbeat personality and lively wit as for his considerable contributions to twentieth-century physics.
Feynman was born in New York City on May 11, 1918. His parents were a considerable influence on him, his father encouraging his inquisitive nature and his mother inspiring his notorious sense of humor. Feynman displayed an early proficiency in engineering and mathematics, which would eventually serve him well when he enrolled at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) to pursue a degree in physics. During his final year there, Feynman won the prestigious undergraduate Putnam Mathematical Competition. He graduated in 1939, after completing an impressive thesis that described a unique method of determining molecular forces.
Feynman continued his study of physics at Princeton University, where he scored perfectly on the mathematics and physics sections of the entrance exams. The prominent theoretician John Archibald Wheeler oversaw Feynman’s doctoral thesis, in which he applied the principle of least action to various aspects of quantum mechanics. The methodology he used supplanted the wave-based depiction of electromagnetism advanced in the mid-19th century by James Clerk Maxwell in favor of his own approach, based on probability mapping of particles and their interactions with one another in space and time.
While still a student at Princeton, Feynman married Arline Greenbaum, whom he had known since high school. Greenbaum suffered from tuberculosis; the couple took great care so that Feynman would not contract the infectious disease. In this period, Feynman was invited to join the atomic-bomb development effort known as the Manhattan Project. Although initially hesitant, he changed his mind after considering another country might produce such a bomb first. Feynman and his wife moved to New Mexico after graduation. While he began work at the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, she stayed in a sanitarium in Albuquerque, close enough for Feynman to visit on the weekends until her death in July 1945.
Hans Bethe, who headed the theoretical division at Los Alamos, made Feynman a group leader, the youngest scientist there appointed to the position. With Bethe, Feynman developed a formula for predicting the amount of energy generated by a nuclear explosive. Feynman also oversaw the overhaul of computer systems used in the research and developed a way to calculate how close fissile material was to reaching a critical state. Later at the Oak Ridge, Tennessee, research facility, he helped determine the safest means of storing nuclear materials.
Feynman was as well known at Los Alamos for his mischievous sense of humor as for his scientific contributions. He developed a talent for picking combination locks, common at a lab where research was top-secret. Colleagues often unlocked their safes and cabinets only to discover humorous notes left there by Feynman.
Feynman attended the first successful test of the atomic bomb on July 16, 1945. He reportedly did not wear the protective glasses donned by others, instead watching from behind a windshield, which he believed would be sufficient to filter out harmful ultraviolet rays. The test was the culmination of many years of hard work, but after the initial elation, Feynman, like many others, grew very concerned about the immense destructive power of the atomic bomb.
After World War II, Feynman accepted a position as assistant professor at Cornell University. There he returned to theoretical work on quantum electrodynamics and developed the graphical means of depicting particle interactions that came to be known as Feynman diagrams. In 1950, Feynman left Cornell for the California Institute of Technology, where he continued reworking QED theory but also addressed topics such as superfluidity and radioactive decay. He collaborated with American physicist Murray Gell-Mann on radioactive decay and the associated weak force. Each scientist developed his own model of the strong force. Feynman’s was termed the parton model; Gell-Mann’s more widely accepted model was based on quarks. Despite his alternative model, Feynman did not deride Gell-Mann’s quark model, and when a fifth quark was discovered, he accurately predicted that a sixth would soon be found.
Feynman was an excellent teacher and popularizer of physics. He played an integral role in updating the physics curriculum at Caltech and gave a series of lectures that were compiled into the extremely influential three-volume text, Feynman Lectures on Physics. Other Feynman talks were put into print, resulting in The Character of Physical Law and QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter. The book Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman! was a series of interviews with the scientist that appeared on the New York Times bestseller list. What Do You Care What Other People Think? and Tuva or Bust! Richard Feynman's Last Journey! came later, the latter after Feynman’s death. What Do You Care included, among other things, anecdotes about Feynman’s work on the presidential Rogers Commission, which investigated the 1986 Challenger space shuttle disaster. Feynman found significantly more fault with NASA management than did most members of the commission; his report appeared as an appendix to the report of the majority.
Not long after completing his work with the Rogers Commission, Feynman fell ill from abdominal cancer. It was his second bout with the disease, which had been successfully treated with surgery in 1980. This time, Feynman refused treatment and died on February 15, 1988. He was survived by his third wife, Gweneth, with whom he had two children.
Feynman received numerous honors over the course of his career. In addition to a share of the Nobel Prize in Physics, he won the Albert Einstein Award, the Atomic Energy Commission's E.O. Lawrence Award, the Niels Bohr International Gold Medal, the National Medal, and the Ørsted Medal of the American Association of Physics Teachers, a prize of which he was especially proud. Feynman’s life has been the subject of several books, plays and movies. 





More Stories



 
  Georg Ohm 



 
  Heike Kamerlingh Onnes 



 
  Michael Faraday 










Physics
Quantum computing


































 

© 2024 National MagLab
Funded by the National Science Foundation (DMR-2128556) and the State of Florida.
Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.



Site Feedback
Privacy Policy
Contact











‹
›
×














