



Rogers Commission Report - Wikipedia




































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Create account

Log in








Personal tools





 Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Commission members








2
Commission witnesses








3
Findings




Toggle Findings subsection





3.1
"An accident rooted in history"








3.2
Flawed launch decision








3.3
Role of Richard Feynman










4
Result








5
See also








6
References








7
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Rogers Commission Report



4 languages




한국어日本語РусскийSimple English

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Government report on the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster


Front page of the Commission Report to Congress
The Rogers Commission Report was written by a Presidential Commission charged with investigating the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster during its 10th mission, STS-51-L. The report, released and submitted to President Ronald Reagan on June 9, 1986, both determined the cause of the disaster that took place 73 seconds after liftoff, and urged NASA to improve and install new safety features on the shuttles and in its organizational handling of future missions.


Commission members[edit]
Members of the Rogers Commission arrive at Kennedy Space Center.
William P. Rogers, chairman and former United States Secretary of State (under Richard Nixon) and United States Attorney General (under Dwight Eisenhower)
Neil Armstrong (vice-chairman), retired astronaut and first human to walk on the Moon (Apollo 11)
David Campion Acheson, diplomat and son of former Secretary of State Dean Acheson
Eugene E. Covert, aeronautics expert and former Chief Scientist of the U.S. Air Force
Richard P. Feynman, theoretical physicist and winner of the 1965 Nobel Prize in Physics
Robert B. Hotz, editor, Aviation Week and Space Technology
Donald J. Kutyna, Air Force general with experience in ICBMs and shuttle management
Sally K. Ride, engineer, astrophysicist and first female American astronaut in space, flew on Challenger as part of missions STS-7 and STS-41-G
Robert W. Rummel, Trans World Airlines executive and aviation consultant to NASA
Joseph F. Sutter, Boeing senior vice president and engineering program director on the Boeing 747 aircraft
Arthur B. C. Walker, Jr, solar physicist and Stanford University professor
Albert D. Wheelon, physicist and developer of Central Intelligence Agency's aerial surveillance program
Charles E. (Chuck) Yeager, retired Air Force general and the first person to break the sound barrier in level flight
Alton G. Keel, Jr., executive director of the commission
Commission witnesses[edit]
Day 1, February 6, 1986[1]

Dr. William R. Graham, Acting Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Jesse W. Moore, Associate Administrator for space flight, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and chairman, 51L Data Design and Analysis Test Task Force
Arnold D. Aldrich, Manager, National space transportation systems program, Johnson Space Center
Dr. Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager, Shuttle Projects office, Marshall Space Flight Center
Robert Sieck, Director of Shuttle operations, Kennedy Space Center
Richard G. Smith, Director, Kennedy Space Center
Thomas L. Moser, Director, Engineering, Johnson Space Center
Richard H. Kohrs, Deputy Manager, National Space transportation systems program, Johnson Space Center
Day 2, February 7, 1986[2]

Marv Jones
Stanley Klein, FBI
Jesse W. Moore, Associate Administrator for space flight, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and chairman, 51L Data Design and Analysis Test Task Force
Arnold Aldrich, Manager, National Space Transportation Systems Program, Johnson Space Center
Day 3, February 10, 1986

Mr L. Michael Weeks, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, NASA
Irvin Davids, Shuttle propulsion Division
Lawrence B. Mulloy, project manager, solid rocket boosters, Marshall Space Flight Center
Day 4, February 11, 1986

William R. Graham, Acting Administrator of NASA
Jesse W. Moore, Associate Administrator for space Flight, NASA
Lawrence B. Mulloy, Project Manager, Solid Rocket Boosters, Marshall Space Flight Center, NASA
Richard C. Cook
Michael B. Mann, Chief, STS Resources Analysis Branch, Office of The Comptroller, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Mr. David Winterhalter, Acting Director, Shuttle Propulsion Group, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Day 5, February 13, 1986 

Dick Kohrs, Deputy Manager, NST Program office, Johnson Space Center
Charlie Stevenson, Photographic Team Analysis, Kennedy Space Center
William R. Lucas
Jesse W. Moore
Milton Silveira
Horace Lamberth
Jim Harrington
T. Jack Lee, Deputy Director, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Head, Marshall Contingency Investigative Team
Mr. George Hardy
Rick Bachtol
T. Moser, Head, Failure Scenario Team, Johnson Space Center
Day 6, February 14, 1986 

Larry Mulloy
Jerry E. Mason, Senior Vice President, Wasatch Operations, Morton Thiokol
Robert Lund, Morton Thiokol, Inc.
Roger Boisjoly, Structures Section, Morton Thiokol, Inc.
Arnold Thompson, Design Engineer, Morton Thiokol, Inc.
Allan J. McDonald, Morton Thiokol, Inc.
Day 7, February 25, 1986

Allan J. McDonald, Manager, SRM Project, Morton-Thiokol, Inc.
Jerry E. Mason, Senior Vice President, Wasatch Division, Morton-Thiokol, Inc.
Roger Boisjoly, Seal Task Force, Thiokol
Arnie Thompson, Supervisor, Structures, Thiokol
Robert Lund, Vice President, Engineering, Thiokol
Joe Kilminster, Vice President, Shuttle Project, Huntsville
Brian G. Russell
Day 8, February 26, 1986

Larry Mulloy, Manager, Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster Program, Marshall Space Flight Center
George C. Hardy, Deputy Director, Science and Engineering, Marshall Space Flight Center
Stanley Reinarz, Manager, Marshall Shuttle projects Office
Dr. Judson A. Lovingood, Deputy Manager, Marshall Shuttle Projects Office
Charles Stevenson, Ice Team member
B. K. Davis, Ice Team member
Lieutenant Colonel Edward F. Kolczynski, Commander, Detachment 11, 2d Weather Squadron, Patrick Air Force Base
Day 9, February 27, 1986

Charles Stevenson
B.K. Davis
Lieutenant Colonel Edward Kolczynski
Rocco Petrone, President, Space Transportation Systems Division, North American Space Operations, Rockwell International
Al Martin, Site Director, Launch Support Operations, Kennedy Space Center, Rockwell International
Bob Glaysher, Vice President and Program Manager, Orbiter Operations Support, Rockwell International
Martin Cioffoletti, Vice President, Space Transportation Systems Integration, Rockwell International
Arnie Aldrich, Manager, National Space Transportation Systems, Johnson Space Center
William R. Lucas, Director, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama
Jesse W. Moore, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, National Aeronautics and Space Administration Headquarters
Dick G. Smith, Director, Kennedy Space Center
Gene Thomas, Director, Launch and Landing Operations, Kennedy Space Center
Ben Powers, Engineer, Structures and Propulsion Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center
Day 10, March 7, 1986 

Colonel Edward O'Connor Jr., USAF, Director of Operations, 6655TH ASTG, ESMC
Robert Lang, Shuttle Operations, Mechanical Systems Division, Kennedy Space Center
Carver Kennedy, Director, VAB Operations, Morton-Thiokol, Inc.
Bill Barsh, Engineering Manager, External Tank/Solid Rocket Booster Operations, Lockheed Space Operations Company, KSC
Thomas L. Moser, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, NASA
Dr. J. Wayne Littles, Associate Director for Engineering, Marshall Space Flight Center
T. Jack Lee, Deputy Director, MSFC
Gary Coultas, Assistant Manager, Orbiter Projects, Johnson Space Center
George Hopson, Director, Systems Analysis and Integration Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center
Day 11, March 21, 1986 

James R. Thompson Jr., Vice Chairman, STS 51L, Data and Design and Analyst Task force, Cape Canaveral, Florida
Colonel Edward O'Connor Jr., Chairman, Search, Recovery and Reconstruction, Cape Canaveral, Florida
Dan M. Germany, Chairman, photo and television support team, Cape Canaveral, and Deputy Manager, Space Station Project Office, Johnson Flight Space Center, Houston, Texas
Charles Stevenson
George McDonough
John Erickson
J. Wayne Littles, Associate Director for Engineering, Marshall Space Flight Center
Harold N. Scofield, Chief, Control Systems Division, Marshall Space Flight Center
Robert S. Ryan, Chief, Structural Dynamics Division Systems Dynamics Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center
Garry M. Lyles, Propulsion Analysis Branch, Structures and Propulsion Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center
Fredrick D. Bachtel, Thermal Engineering Branch, Structures and Propulsion Laboratory, Marshall Space Flight Center
Day 12, April 3, 1986

George Abbey, Director of Flight Crew Operations
John Young, Chief, Astronaut Office
Paul J. Weitz, Deputy Chief, Astronaut Office
Bob Crippen, astronaut
Hank Hartsfield, astronuat
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, Associate Administrator for space flight
Arnold D. Aldrich, manager of the space transportation systems
Clifford E. Charlesworth, director of space operations
Day 13, May 3, 1986 

Lawrence B. Mulloy, Manager, Solid Rocket Booster Project Office
Lawrence O. Wear, Manager, Solid Rocket Motor Project, Marshall Space Flight Center
Brian G. Russell, Program Manager, Department of solid rocket motor and Final Assembly
Robert Ebeling, Department of solid rocket motor igniter and Final Assembly
J.C. Kilminster, Vice President, Space Booster Programs
Roger Boisjoly, Seal Task Force, Morton Thiokol, Inc.
George B. Hardy, Deputy Director, Science and Engineering, former Manager, Solid Rocket Booster office
James E. Kingsbury, Science and Engineering
Robert G. Eudy, former Chief Engineer, Solid Rocket Motor, Office of Associate Director For Engineering
John O. Miller, Technical Assistant To Solid Rocket Motor Manager
William L. Ray, Solid Rocket Motor Branch, Propulsion Division, Engineering Directorate
L. Michael Weeks, Associate Administrator, (technical) for space flight, NASA
Glynn S. Lunney, former Manager, National Space Transportation Systems Program Office
John R. Stocker, Assistant General counsel, corporate offices, Rockwell International, corporation
Findings[edit]
The Space Shuttle solid rocket booster field joint assembly (from the Rogers Commission report)
The commission found that the immediate cause of the Challenger accident was a failure in the O-rings sealing the aft field joint on the right solid rocket booster, causing pressurized hot gases and eventually flame to "blow by" the O-ring and contact the adjacent external tank, causing structural failure. The failure of the O-rings was attributed to a design flaw, as their performance could be too easily compromised by factors including the low temperature on the day of launch.[3]

"An accident rooted in history"[edit]
More broadly, the report also determined the contributing causes of the accident. Most salient was the failure of both NASA and its contractor, Morton Thiokol, to respond adequately to the design flaw. The Commission found that as early as 1977, NASA managers had not only known about the flawed O-ring, but that it had the potential for catastrophe. This led the Rogers Commission to conclude that the Challenger disaster was "an accident rooted in history".[4]

Flawed launch decision[edit]
The report also strongly criticized the decision-making process that led to the launch of Challenger, saying that it was seriously flawed. Morton Thiokol called a meeting the night before the launch to raise concerns over the forecast temperature in regards to the O-rings. During the meeting, Morton Thiokol's engineers issued a recommendation "not to launch below 53F", the previous lowest temperature of a launch (STS-51C, a year earlier). The NASA managers challenged this and after a 30 minute offline caucus, Morton Thiokol's senior management overruled their engineers' decision and gave the launch the go-ahead. The concerns were not communicated beyond the Level III Flight Readiness Review (FRR).[5] It is certain that even though members of higher FRR teams knew about the issues, there were plenty of members who could have stopped the launch but decided not to. This was done in large part because of the management structure at NASA and the lack of major checks and balances, which proved to be fatal in this scenario.[citation needed][6] The report concluded that:

... failures in communication ... resulted in a decision to launch 51-L based on incomplete and sometimes misleading information, a conflict between engineering data and management judgments, and a NASA management structure that permitted internal flight safety problems to bypass key Shuttle managers.[5]
Role of Richard Feynman[edit]
This section may be too long to read and navigate comfortably. Consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (September 2021)
I took this stuff that I got out of your seal and I put it in ice water, and I discovered that when you put some pressure on it for a while and then undo it, it maintains, it doesn't stretch back. It stays the same dimension. In other words, for a few seconds at least and more seconds than that, there's no resilience in this particular material when it's at a temperature of 32 degrees [Fahrenheit]. I believe that has some significance to our problem.— Richard Feynman, [7]
One of the commission's best-known members was theoretical physicist Richard Feynman. His style of investigating with his own direct methods rather than following the commission schedule put him at odds with Rogers, who once commented, "Feynman is becoming a real pain."[8] During a televised hearing, Feynman famously demonstrated how the O-rings became less resilient and subject to seal failures at low temperatures by compressing a sample of the material in a clamp and immersing it in a glass of ice water.[7] Feynman's own investigation reveals a disconnect between NASA's engineers and executives that was far more striking than he expected. His interviews of NASA's high-ranking managers revealed startling misunderstandings of elementary concepts. One such concept was the determination of a safety factor.[9]
In one example, early tests resulted in some of the booster rocket's O-rings burning a third of the way through. These O-rings provided the gas-tight seal needed between the vertically stacked cylindrical sections that made up the solid fuel booster. NASA managers recorded this result as demonstrating that the O-rings had a "safety factor" of 3. Feynman incredulously explains the magnitude of this error: A "safety factor" refers to the practice of building an object to be capable of withstanding more force than the force to which it will conceivably be subjected. To paraphrase Feynman's example, if engineers built a bridge that could bear 3,000 pounds without any damage, even though it was never expected to bear more than 1,000 pounds in practice, the safety factor would be 3. If a 1,000-pound truck drove across the bridge and a crack appeared in a beam, even just a third of the way through a beam, the safety factor is now zero: The bridge is defective, there was no safety factor at all even though the bridge did not actually collapse.[9]
Feynman was clearly disturbed by the fact that NASA management not only misunderstood this concept, but inverted it by using a term denoting an extra level of safety to describe a part that was actually defective and unsafe. Feynman continued to investigate the lack of communication between NASA's management and its engineers, and was struck by management's claim that the risk of catastrophic malfunction on the shuttle was 1 in 105, i.e. 1 in 100,000. Feynman immediately realized that this claim was risible on its face; as he described, this assessment of risk would entail that NASA could expect to launch a shuttle every day for the next 274 years while suffering, on average, only one accident. Investigating the claim further, Feynman discovered that the 1 in 105 figure was stating what they claimed the failure rate ought to be, given that it was a manned vehicle, and working backward to generate the failure rate of components.[9]
Feynman was disturbed by two aspects of this practice. First, NASA management assigned a probability of failure to each individual bolt, sometimes claiming a probability of 1 in 108, i.e. one in one hundred million. Feynman pointed out that it is impossible to calculate such a remote possibility with any scientific rigor. Secondly, Feynman was bothered not just by this sloppy science but by the fact that NASA claimed that the risk of catastrophic failure was "necessarily" 1 in 105. As the figure itself was beyond belief, Feynman questioned exactly what "necessarily" meant in this context, whether it meant that the figure followed logically from other calculations or that it reflected NASA management's desire to make the numbers fit.[9]
Feynman suspected that the 1 in 105 figure was wildly fantastical, and made a rough estimate that the true likelihood of shuttle disaster was closer to 1 in 100. He then decided to poll the engineers themselves, asking them to write down an anonymous estimate of the odds of shuttle explosion. Feynman found that the bulk of the engineers' estimates fell between 1 in 50 and 1 in 200 (at the time of retirement, the Shuttle suffered two catastrophic failures across 135 flights, for a failure rate of 1 in 67.5). Not only did this confirm that NASA management had clearly failed to communicate with their own engineers, but the disparity engaged Feynman's emotions. When describing these wildly differing estimates, Feynman briefly lapses from his damaging but dispassionate detailing of NASA's flaws to recognize the moral failing that resulted from a scientific failing: he was upset NASA presented its fantastical figures as fact to convince a member of the public, schoolteacher Christa McAuliffe, to join the crew. Feynman was not uncomfortable with the concept of a 1⁄100 risk factor, but felt strongly that the recruitment of laypeople required an honest portrayal of the true risk involved.[9]
Feynman's investigation eventually suggested to him that the cause of the Challenger disaster was the very part to which NASA management so mistakenly assigned a safety factor. The O-rings were rubber rings designed to form a seal in the shuttle's solid rocket boosters, preventing the rockets' hot gas from escaping and damaging other parts of the vehicle. Feynman suspected that despite NASA's claims, the O-rings were unsuitable at low temperatures and lost their resilience when cold, thus failing to maintain a tight seal when rocket pressure distorted the structure of the solid fuel booster. Feynman's suspicions were corroborated by General Kutyna, also on the commission, who cunningly[10] provided Feynman with a broad hint by asking about the effect of cold on O-ring seals after mentioning that the temperature on the day of the launch was far lower than had been the case with previous launches: below freezing at 28 to 29 °F (−2.2 to −1.7 °C); previously, the coldest launch had been at 53 °F (12 °C). In 2013, the BBC film The Challenger revealed that the O-ring insight had in fact come to Kutyna from the astronaut and fellow commission member Sally Ride, who had secretly provided him with NASA test results showing the O-rings became stiff when they were too cold.[11]
Feynman's investigations also revealed that there had been many serious doubts raised about the O-ring seals by engineers at Morton Thiokol, which made the solid fuel boosters, but communication failures had led to their concerns being ignored by NASA management. He found similar failures in procedure in many other areas at NASA, but singled out its software development for praise due to its rigorous and highly effective quality control procedures – then under threat from NASA management, which wished to reduce testing to save money given that the tests had always been passed.[12]

Based on his experiences with NASA's management and engineers, Feynman concluded that the serious deficiencies in NASA management's scientific understanding, the lack of communication between the two camps, and the gross misrepresentation of the Shuttle's dangers, required that NASA take a hiatus from Shuttle launches until it could resolve its internal inconsistencies and present an honest picture of the shuttle's reliability. Feynman soon found that, while he respected the intellects of his fellow Commission members, they universally finished their criticisms of NASA with clear affirmations that the Challenger disaster should be addressed by NASA internally, but that there was no need for NASA to suspend its operations or to receive less funding. Feynman felt that the Commission's conclusions misrepresented its findings, and he could not in good conscience recommend that such a deeply flawed organization as NASA should continue without a suspension of operations and a major overhaul. His fellow commission members were alarmed by Feynman's dissent, and it was only after much petitioning that Feynman's minority report was included at all. Feynman was so critical of flaws in NASA's "safety culture" that he threatened to remove his name from the report unless it included his personal observations on the reliability of the shuttle, which appeared as Appendix F.[9][13] In the appendix, he stated: It appears that there are enormous differences of opinion as to the probability of a failure with loss of vehicle and of human life. The estimates range from roughly 1 in 100 to 1 in 100,000. The higher figures come from the working engineers, and the very low figures from management. What are the causes and consequences of this lack of agreement? Since 1 part in 100,000 would imply that one could put a Shuttle up each day for 300 years expecting to lose only one, we could properly ask "What is the cause of management's fantastic faith in the machinery? ... It would appear that, for whatever purpose, be it for internal or external consumption, the management of NASA exaggerates the reliability of its product, to the point of fantasy.[9]
"For a successful technology," Feynman concluded, "reality must take precedence over public relations, for nature cannot be fooled."[9]
Feynman later wrote about the investigation in his 1988 book What Do You Care What Other People Think?.[14] The second half of the book covers the investigation and the issues between science and politics, and includes the appendix he wrote.
Feynman later reported that, although he had believed he was making discoveries about the problems at NASA on his own, he eventually realized that either NASA or contractor personnel, in an apparent effort to anonymously focus attention on these problem areas, had carefully led him to the evidence which would support the conclusions on which he would later report.[14][15]

Result[edit]
The Rogers Commission offered nine recommendations on improving safety in the space shuttle program, and NASA was directed by President Reagan to report back within thirty days as to how it planned to implement those recommendations.[16] This is a summary of the chapter of Recommendations:[17]


Design and Independent Oversight
Shuttle Management Structure, Astronauts in Management and Shuttle Safety Panel
Criticality Review and Hazard Analysis
Safety Organization
Improved Communications
Landing Safety
Launch Abort and Crew Escape
Flight Rate
Maintenance Safeguards

In response to the commission's recommendation, NASA initiated a total redesign of the space shuttle's solid rocket boosters, which was watched over by an independent oversight group as stipulated by the commission.[16] NASA's contract with Morton Thiokol, the contractor responsible for the solid rocket boosters, included a clause stating that in the event of a failure leading to "loss of life or mission," Thiokol would forfeit $10 million of its incentive fee and formally accept legal liability for the failure. After the Challenger accident, Thiokol agreed to "voluntarily accept" the monetary penalty in exchange for not being forced to accept liability.[18]
NASA also created a new Office of Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance, headed as the commission had specified by a NASA associate administrator who reported directly to the NASA administrator. George Rodney, formerly of Martin Marietta, was appointed to this position.[19] Former Challenger flight director Jay Greene became chief of the Safety Division of the directorate.[20]
The unrealistically optimistic launch schedule pursued by NASA had been criticized by the Rogers Commission as a possible contributing cause to the accident. After the accident, NASA attempted to aim at a more realistic shuttle flight rate: it added another orbiter, Endeavour, to the space shuttle fleet to replace Challenger, and it worked with the Department of Defense to put more satellites in orbit using expendable launch vehicles rather than the shuttle.[21] In August 1986, President Reagan also announced that the shuttle would no longer carry commercial satellite payloads. After a 32-month hiatus, the next shuttle mission, STS-26, was launched on September 29, 1988.
After the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster in 2003, attention once again focused on the attitude of NASA management towards safety issues. The Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) concluded that NASA had failed to learn many of the lessons of Challenger. In particular, the agency had not set up a truly independent office for safety oversight; the CAIB felt that in this area, "NASA's response to the Rogers Commission did not meet the Commission's intent".[22] The CAIB believed that "the causes of the institutional failure responsible for Challenger have not been fixed," saying that the same "flawed decision-making process" that had resulted in the Challenger accident was responsible for Columbia's destruction seventeen years later.[23]

See also[edit]
Columbia Accident Investigation Board
Apollo 1
References[edit]


^ "Hearings of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident". Retrieved June 30, 2023.

^ "Hearings of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident". Retrieved June 30, 2023.

^ Rogers Commission report (1986). "Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident". p. 72.

^ Rogers Commission report (1986). "Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident".

^ a b Rogers Commission report (1986). "Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident". Retrieved January 1, 2007.

^ United States Government Accountability Office

^ a b 
Gleick, James (February 17, 1988). "Richard Feynman dead at 69; Leading theoretical physicist". Obituary. New York Times. Retrieved January 28, 2007.

^ Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman (1992) by James Gleick, p. 423

^ a b c d e f g h Feynman, R. P. (June 6, 1986). "Volume 2: Appendix F - Personal Observations on Reliability of Shuttle". Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. NASA. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022.

^ Feynman, Richard P.; Leighton, Ralph (1988). What do you Care what Other People Think? Further Adventures of a Curious Character. W.W. Norton. Afterthoughts. ISBN 978-0393320923.

^ "An Oral History of the Space Shuttle Challenger Disaster". Popular Mechanics. January 28, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2016.

^ Feynman, Richard P.; Leighton, Ralph (1988). What do you Care what Other People Think? Further Adventures of a Curious Character. W.W. Norton. An Inflamed Appendix. ISBN 978-0393320923.

^ Feynman, Richard P.; Leighton, Ralph (1989). What Do You Care What Other People Think?. New York: Bantam Books. p. 204. ISBN 0553347845.

^ a b Feynman, Richard P.; Leighton, Ralph (1988). What Do You Care What Other People Think? Further Adventures of a Curious Character. W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0393026597.

^ The Best Mind Since Einstein (video documentary). NOVA. Boston, MA & London: WGBH & BBC-TV. 1993.

^ a b "Report to the President: Actions to Implement the Recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident" (PDF). NASA. July 14, 1986.

^ chapter of Recommendations

^ Jensen, Claus. No Downlink, p. 355.

^ Rogers Commission report (1987). "Implementation of the Recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Recommendation IV". Retrieved July 12, 2011.

^ J.H. Greene (February 11, 2015). "NASA Johnson Space Center Oral History Project Biographical Data Sheet" (PDF). NASA.

^ Rogers Commission report (1987). "Implementation of the Recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Recommendation VII". Retrieved July 12, 2011.

^ Columbia Accident Investigation Board (2003). "Report of Columbia Accident Investigation Board" (PDF). p. 178. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 24, 2011. Retrieved July 12, 2011.

^ Columbia Accident Investigation Board (2003). "Report of Columbia Accident Investigation Board" (PDF). p. 195. Retrieved July 12, 2011.


External links[edit]
Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident – the Rogers Commission report on the accident (NASA.gov parsed HTML version)
Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident – pdf version, compiled by Thomas ('thomasafb') – Volume I only
 Report to the President by the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident public domain audiobook at LibriVox
Hearing on the Space Shuttle Accident and the Rogers Commission Report. 219 pages (14.2 MB) U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space. Date: 99th Congress, 2nd Session, February 18, June 10 and 17, 1986. See also GPO Challenger index page.
[1] – Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Appendix F – Personal Observations on Reliability of Shuttle by R. P. Feynman
vteSTS-51-L
Space Shuttle Challenger disaster
Main articles
Space Shuttle Challenger
Timeline of STS-51-L
Crew
Dick Scobee
Michael J. Smith
Judith Resnik
Ellison Onizuka
Ronald McNair
Gregory Jarvis
Christa McAuliffe
See also
Rogers Commission Report
Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster
TDRS-B
Challenger flag
Challenger (1990 film)
The Challenger Disaster (2013 film)
Challenger: The Final Flight (2020 documentary miniseries)

vteSpace Shuttle Challenger (OV-099)Flights
STS-6
STS-7
STS-8
STS-41-B
STS-41-C
STS-41-G
STS-51-B
STS-51-F
STS-61-A
STS-51-L
Status
Out of service - Challenger disaster (destroyed) - January 28, 1986 (STS-51-L)
Related
Rogers Commission
STS-61-F
STS-61-M
Challenger flag
The Dream Is Alive (1985 documentary)
Challenger (1990 film)
When We Left Earth: The NASA Missions (2008 documentary miniseries)
The Challenger Disaster (2013 film)
Challenger: The Final Flight (2020 documentary miniseries)

vteSpace Shuttle program
Space Shuttle
List of missions
List of crews
Components
Orbiter
Solid Rocket Booster
External tank
Main engine
Orbital Maneuvering System
Reaction control system
Thermal protection system
Booster separation motor
Orbiters
Enterprise
Columbia
Challenger
Discovery
Atlantis
Endeavour
Add-ons
Spacelab (ESA)
Canadarm (CSA)
Extended Duration Orbiter
Remote Controlled Orbiter
Spacehab
Multi-Purpose Logistics Module
Sites
Launch Complex 39
A
B
Space Launch Complex 6
Landing sites
Shuttle Landing Facility
Abort landing sites
Operationsand training
Missions (canceled)
Crews
Mission timeline
Rollbacks
Abort modes
Rendezvous pitch maneuver
Shuttle Mission Simulator
Shuttle Training Aircraft
Testing
Inspiration (design)
Pathfinder (simulator)
MPTA (engine test article)
Approach and Landing Tests
Disasters
Challenger disaster (report)
Columbia disaster (report)
Support
Crawler-transporter
Mate-Demate Device
Mobile Launcher Platform
NASA recovery ship
Orbiter Processing Facility
Shuttle Avionics Integration Laboratory (SAIL)
Shuttle Carrier Aircraft
flights
Shuttle Training Aircraft
STS-3xx
Special
Deutschland-1
Getaway Special
Journalist in Space Project
Teacher in Space Project
Shuttle-Mir
Hitchhiker
Space suits
Extravehicular Mobility Unit
Shuttle Ejection Escape Suit
Launch Entry Suit
Advanced Crew Escape Suit
Experiments
Freestar experiments
Inflatable Antenna Experiment
Spartan Packet Radio Experiment
Shuttle pallet satellite
Wake Shield Facility
Derivatives
Saturn-Shuttle
Magnum
Shuttle-Derived Heavy Lift Launch Vehicle
Jupiter
Shuttle-C
Shuttle-Centaur
Ares
I
IV
V
Liberty
Space Launch System
OmegA
Replicas
Independence
Related
Space Shuttle design process
studied designs
Inertial Upper Stage
Payload Assist Module
International Space Station
Criticism
Retirement
Conroy Virtus
Hail Columbia (1982 documentary)
The Dream Is Alive (1985 documentary)
Challenger (1990 film)
Destiny in Space (1994 documentary)
Columbia: The Tragic Loss (2004 documentary)
Hubble (2010 documentary)
The Challenger Disaster (2013 film)
Challenger: The Final Flight (2020 documentary miniseries)
Space Shuttle America
Rendezvous: A Space Shuttle Simulation
Space Shuttle Project
Shuttle
Space Shuttle: A Journey into Space
Space Shuttle Mission 2007
Orbiter Space Flight Simulator
When We Left Earth: The NASA Missions

vteNASAPolicy and historyHistory(creation)
NACA (1915)
National Aeronautics and Space Act (1958)
Space Task Group (1958)
Paine (1986)
Rogers (1986)
Ride (1987)
Space Exploration Initiative (1989)
Augustine (1990)
U.S. National Space Policy (1996)
CFUSAI (2002)
CAIB (2003)
Vision for Space Exploration (2004)
Aldridge (2004)
Augustine (2009)
General
Space Race
Administrator and Deputy Administrator
Chief Scientist
Astronaut Corps
Ranks and positions
Chief
Budget
NASA research
spinoff technologies
NASA+
NASA TV
NASA Social
Launch Services Program
Mercury Control Center
Manned Space Flight Network
Kennedy Space Center
Vehicle Assembly Building
Launch Complex 39
Launch Complex 48
Launch Control Center
Operations and Checkout Building
Johnson Space Center
Mission Control
Lunar Sample Laboratory
Science Mission Directorate
Human spaceflightprogramsPast
X-15 (suborbital)
Mercury
Gemini
Apollo
Skylab
Apollo–Soyuz (with the Soviet space program)
Space Shuttle
Shuttle–Mir (with Roscosmos State Corporation)
Constellation
Current
International Space Station
Commercial Orbital Transportation Services
Commercial Crew
Orion
Artemis
Lunar Gateway
Robotic programsPast
Hitchhiker
Mariner
Mariner Mark II
MESUR
Mars Surveyor '98
New Millennium
Lunar Orbiter
Pioneer
Planetary Observer
Ranger
Surveyor
Viking
Project Prometheus
Mars Exploration
Mars Exploration Rover
Current
Living With a Star
Lunar Precursor Robotic Program
Earth Observing System
Great Observatories program
Explorers
Voyager
Discovery
New Frontiers
Solar Terrestrial Probes
Commercial Lunar Payload Services
SIMPLEx
Individual featured missions(human and robotic)Past
Apollo 11
COBE
Mercury 3
Mercury-Atlas 6
Magellan
Pioneer 10
Pioneer 11
Galileo
timeline
GALEX
GRAIL
WMAP
Space Shuttle
Spitzer Space Telescope
Sojourner rover
Spirit rover
LADEE
MESSENGER
Aquarius
Cassini
Dawn
Kepler space telescope
Opportunity rover
timeline
observed
RHESSI
InSight
Ingenuity helicopter
flights
Currentlyoperating
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter
2001 Mars Odyssey
New Horizons
International Space Station
Hubble Space Telescope
Swift
THEMIS
Mars Exploration Rover
Curiosity rover
timeline
GOES 14
Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter
GOES 15
Van Allen Probes
Solar Dynamics Observatory
Juno
Mars Science Laboratory
timeline
NuSTAR
Voyager 1
Voyager 2
WISE
MAVEN
MMS
OSIRIS-REx
Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite
Mars 2020
Perseverance rover
timeline
James Webb Space Telescope
timeline
PACE
Future
Joint Polar Satellite System
NISAR
Europa Clipper
Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope
Communicationsand navigation
Near Earth Network
Space Network
Deep Space Network (Goldstone
Madrid
Canberra
Space Flight Operations Facility)
Deep Space Atomic Clock
NASA lists
Astronauts
by name
by year
Gemini astronauts
Apollo astronauts
Space Shuttle crews
NASA aircraft
NASA missions
uncrewed missions
Apollo missions
Space Shuttle missions
United States rockets
NASA cancellations
NASA cameras on spacecraft
NASA imagesand artwork
Earthrise
The Blue Marble
Family Portrait
Pale Blue Dot
Pillars of Creation
Mystic Mountain
Solar System Family Portrait
The Day the Earth Smiled
Fallen Astronaut
Deep fields
Lunar plaques
Pioneer plaques
Voyager Golden Record
Apollo 11 goodwill messages
NASA insignia
Gemini and Apollo medallions
Mission patches
Hubble Space Telescope anniversary images
Related
"We choose to go to the Moon"
Apollo 8 Genesis reading
Apollo 15 postal covers incident
Space Mirror Memorial
The Astronaut Monument
Lunar sample displays
Moon rocks
stolen or missing
U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame
Space program on U.S. stamps
Apollo 17 Moon mice
Moon tree
Other primates in space
NASA International Space Apps Challenge
Astronauts Day
Nikon NASA F4

 Category
 Commons

vteRichard FeynmanCareer
Feynman diagram
Feynman–Kac formula
Wheeler–Feynman absorber theory
Bethe–Feynman formula
Hellmann–Feynman theorem
Feynman slash notation
Feynman parametrization
Path integral formulation
Parton model
Sticky bead argument
One-electron universe
Quantum cellular automaton
Rogers Commission Report
Feynman checkerboard
Feynman sprinkler
Works
"There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom" (1959)
The Feynman Lectures on Physics (1964)
The Character of Physical Law (1965)
QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter (1985)
Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman! (1985)
What Do You Care What Other People Think? (1988)
Feynman's Lost Lecture: The Motion of Planets Around the Sun (1997)
The Meaning of It All (1999)
The Pleasure of Finding Things Out (1999)
Perfectly Reasonable Deviations from the Beaten Track (2005)
Family
Joan Feynman (sister)
Charles Hirshberg (nephew)
Related
Namesakes
Cargo cult science
Quantum Man: Richard Feynman's Life in Science
Tuva or Bust!
Feynman Prize in Nanotechnology
Infinity (1996 film)
QED (2001 play)
The Challenger Disaster (2013 film)

Portals: Politics Spaceflight United States 1980s






Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rogers_Commission_Report&oldid=1225831004"
Categories: NASA oversightReports of the United States government1986 in the United StatesUnited States Presidential CommissionsSpace Shuttle Challenger disasterRichard Feynman1986 worksNeil ArmstrongSally RideChuck YeagerHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataUse mdy dates from August 2022All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2018Articles that may be too long from September 2021Articles with LibriVox linksUse American English from January 2014All Wikipedia articles written in American English






 This page was last edited on 27 May 2024, at 00:09 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view


















