











































Selected Mathematical Methods in Theoretical Physics - 1st Edition - V




















































Skip to main content

 Free standard shipping on all orders















Search






To hear autocomplete suggestions tab past the search button after typing keywords.

















 Shop By Subject 










 New & Bestselling 




 Instructors & Students 




 Professional Practice 


 Publish With Us 




 Sale & Offers 


































 Preview Book





Preview Book


 





 Table of Contents
 Book Description
 Instructor Resources


1st Edition
Selected Mathematical Methods in Theoretical Physics


By Vladmir P. Krainov
Copyright 2001


















210 Pages



by
CRC Press








































Description




Selected Mathematical Methods in Theoretical Physics shows how a scientist, knowing the answer to a problem intuitively or through experiment, can develop a mathematical method to prove that answer. The approach adopted by the author first involves the formulation of differential or integral equations for describing the physical procession, the basis of more general physical laws. Then the approximate solution of these equations is worked out, using small dimensionless physical parameters, or using numerical parameters for the objects under consideration. The eleven chapters of the book, which can be read in sequence or studied independently of each other, contain many examples of simple physical models, as well as problems for students to solve. This is a supplementary textbook for advanced university students in theoretical physics. It will enrich the knowledge of students who already have a solid grounding in mathematical analysis.






Table of Contents



Calculation of Integrals. Continual Integrals. Calculation of Green's Functions. The Whittaker Method. Intense Peterbations. Inverse Problems. The Self-Consistent Approximation. Soliton Solutions. Dynamic Chaos. Prey-predator Population Models. Random Processes.





Author(s)



Biography

Vladmir P. Krainov









 Add to Cart









About VitalSource eBooks



VitalSource is a leading provider of eBooks.

 Access your materials anywhere, at anytime.
 Customer preferences like text size, font type, page color and more.
 Take annotations in line as you read.



View VitalSource eBook FAQs »










Multiple eBook Copies



This eBook is already in your shopping cart. If you would like to replace it with a different purchasing option please remove the current eBook option from your cart.





View Cart













Related Subjects


Mathematical Physics


Applied Mathematics


Mathematics & Statistics


Mathematics for Physics


Mathematical Physics




Frequently Bought Together
















Book Preview

































Back To Top 












©  Informa UK Limited, an Informa Plc company




Contact Us


Customer Service


Editorial Contacts


Sales Contacts


Rights and Permissions


Become an Affiliate Partner Opens in new tab or window


FAQs
Partners


Customer Resources


Authors


Booksellers


Instructors


Request An Inspection Copy


Librarians


Press and Media


Professionals


Societies and Associations


Students




Our Products


eBooks


eBook+


Book Series


Online Platforms


Open Access Books


Focus Shortform Books 




About Us


About Routledge


About Taylor & Francis Opens in new tab or window


Taylor & Francis Journals Opens in new tab or window


Careers Opens in new tab or window


Blog
Topics


Policies


Shipping Information


Returns and Cancellations


Terms and Conditions


Inspection Copies


Sustainability


Accessibility


Privacy Policy Opens in new tab or window



SOCIAL  NETWORKS 
Facebook - Opens in new tab or window       LinkedIn - Opens in new tab or window      Twitter - Opens in new tab or window       YouTube - Opens in new tab or window   













The country you have selected will result in the following:



Product pricing will be adjusted to match the corresponding currency.
The title Perception will be removed from your cart because it is not available in this region.




Continue
Cancel
















