

StarChild: Dr. Stephen Hawking










Dr. Stephen Hawking







Isn't that amazing?


Dr. Hawking is best known for his discovery that  black holes emit
radiation which can be detected by special instrumentation.  His
discovery has made the detailed study of black holes possible.


Stephen Hawking was born in Oxford, England on January 8, 1942. At the age of 17, he enrolled at University College, Oxford. He wanted to study mathematics, but resorted to the study of  physics. He pursued a Ph.D. in physics despite being diagnosed with Ameliotrophic Lateral Sclerosis while at Oxford. This disease is progressive and slowly affects the nerves supplying all muscles in the body. In 1985 he became ill with pneumonia and since that time he has required 24-hour nursing care. Through Dr. Hawking's incredible determination and with the help of family and associates, he lived to be 76 years old. Until the end of his life on March 14, 2018, he held Isaac Newton's chair as the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge University in England.
In 1970, Dr. Hawking began work on the characteristics of black holes. As a result of his research, it was predicted that black holes emit radiation in the X-ray to  gamma-ray range of the spectrum.  In the 1980s, he returned to an earlier interest in the origins of the  universe and how quantum mechanics may affect its fate. He co-authored many publications such as "300 Years of Gravity" and "The Large Scale Structure of Space-time". Dr. Hawking also wrote books such as A Brief History of Time and Black Holes and Baby Universes and Other Essays.



A Question
True or False?

Dr. Hawking predicted that black holes emit radiation which falls into
the visible light range on the electromagnetic spectrum.
        




 
        Did you know?
 
         The Answer








Show me the Level 1 version of this page.













        Return to the StarChild Main Page


        Go to Imagine the Universe! (A site for ages 14 and up.)

 
 






   The StarChild site is a service of the
High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive
Research Center (HEASARC),
 within the
Astrophysics Science Division (ASD) at
NASA/
GSFC.

StarChild Authors: The StarChild Team
StarChild Graphics & Music: Acknowledgments


StarChild Project Leader: Dr. Laura A.
Whitlock

Curator: J.D. Myers

Responsible NASA Official: Amber Straughn

Privacy Policy and Important Notices





