



Study.com - World's Most Puzzling Unsolved Math Problems















































for Teachers
for Schools
for Working Scholars®
for College Credit

























Log In


Sign Up

Menu
					










									Plans
							



									Subjects
							





Art


Business


Computer Science


Education & Teaching


English


Health & Medicine


History


Humanities


Math


Psychology


Science


Social Science







							 
						



									Art
							



									Architecture 




									Art History 




									Design 




									Performing Arts 




									Visual Arts 






							 
						



									Business
							



									Accounting 




									Business Administration 




									Business Communication 




									Business Ethics 




									Business Intelligence 




									Business Law 




									Economics 




									Finance 




									Healthcare Administration 




									Human Resources 




									Information Technology 




									International Business 




									Operations Management 




									Real Estate 




									Sales & Marketing 






							 
						



									Computer Science
							



									Computer Engineering 




									Computer Programming 




									Cybersecurity 




									Data Science 




									Software 






							 
						



									Education & Teaching
							



									Education Law & Policy 




									Pedagogy & Teaching Strategies 




									Special & Specialized Education 




									Student Support in Education 




									Teaching English Language Learners 






							 
						



									English
							



									Grammar 




									Literature 




									Public Speaking 




									Reading 




									Vocabulary 




									Writing & Composition 






							 
						



									Health & Medicine
							



									Counseling & Therapy 




									Health 




									Medicine 




									Nursing 




									Nutrition 






							 
						



									History
							



									US History 




									World History 






							 
						



									Humanities
							



									Communication 




									Ethics 




									Foreign Languages 




									Philosophy 




									Religious Studies 






							 
						



									Math
							



									Algebra 




									Basic Math 




									Calculus 




									Geometry 




									Statistics 




									Trigonometry 






							 
						



									Psychology
							



									Clinical & Abnormal Psychology 




									Cognitive Science 




									Developmental Psychology 




									Educational Psychology 




									Organizational Psychology 




									Social Psychology 






							 
						



									Science
							



									Anatomy & Physiology 




									Astronomy 




									Biology 




									Chemistry 




									Earth Science 




									Engineering 




									Environmental Science 




									Physics 






							 
						



									Social Science
							



									Anthropology 




									Criminal Justice 




									Geography 




									Law 




									Linguistics 




									Political Science 




									Sociology 







									Courses
							





By Subject


By Education Level


Adult Education


Transferable Credit







							By Subject
						



									Arts 




									Business 




									Computer Science 




									Education & Teaching 




									English (ELA) 




									Foreign Language 




									Health & Medicine 




									History 




									Humanities 




									Math 




									Psychology 




									Science 




									Social Science 






							By Education Level
						



									Elementary School 




									Middle School 




									High School 




									College 




									Graduate and Post-Grad 







									Test Prep
							





Teacher Certification Exams


Nursing Exams


Allied Health & Medicine Exams


Real Estate Exams


All Test Prep







							 
						



									Teacher Certification Exams
							



									Praxis 




									FTCE 




									TExES 




									CSET & CBEST 




									More Teacher Certification Test Prep 






							 
						



									Nursing Exams
							



									NCLEX 




									HESI 




									More Nursing Test Prep 






							 
						



									Allied Health & Medicine Exams
							



									ASCP 




									CNA 




									CNS 




									More Medical Test Prep 






							 
						



									Real Estate Exams
							



									Real Estate Sales 




									Real Estate Brokers 




									Real Estate Appraisals 







									Teach
							





Teaching Resources and Curriculum


Skills Practice


Lesson Plans


Teacher Certification


Teacher Professional Development








									Tutoring
							





Math Tutoring


Science Tutoring


Business Tutoring


Humanities Tutoring







							 
						



									Math Tutoring
							



									Algebra  Tutoring




									Calculus  Tutoring




									Geometry  Tutoring




									Pre-calculus  Tutoring




									Statistics  Tutoring




									Trigonometry  Tutoring






							 
						



									Science Tutoring
							



									Biology  Tutoring




									Chemistry  Tutoring




									Physics  Tutoring






							 
						



									Business Tutoring
							



									Accounting  Tutoring




									Economics  Tutoring




									Finance  Tutoring






							 
						



									Humanities Tutoring
							



									History  Tutoring




									Literature  Tutoring




									Writing  Tutoring






Sign Up

























Copyright





 Resources
			


World's Most Puzzling Unsolved Math Problems

Expert commentary provided by math expert Marty Parks, BA in Mathematics
In the world of mathematics, there are a set of unsolved problems that have challenged the brightest mathematicians, physicists, and scientists, for decades. Their solutions could unlock new doors in technology, science, and beyond. Come explore seven enduring math problems, examine where we stand in solving them, and discover what new horizons their solutions could unlock.
1. Riemann Hypothesis
The Riemann Hypothesis, proposed by Bernhard Riemann in 1859, is a central problem in number theory, and discusses the distribution of prime numbers. The hypothesis focuses on the zeros of the Riemann zeta function. Riemann, who built on the work of Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler, postulated that all non-trivial zeros of this zeta function lie on a critical line in the complex plane, known as the critical line Re(s) = 0.5. The function itself is complex to define, and the infinite nature of its zeros adds to the challenge. A proof must convincingly demonstrate that all zeros cannot deviate from the expected line, which requires a deep understanding of complex analysis and number theory.
Impact of Solution
Solving the Riemann Hypothesis would be a landmark achievement in mathematics, notably in the field of cryptography, which is vital for things like internet security. Confirming the hypothesis would also greatly improve our understanding of prime numbers and would validate many mathematical papers that currently take the Riemann hypothesis as a given, thus solidifying a broad range of mathematical theories.
Progress
Many mathematicians have tried to prove the Riemann Hypothesis over the years to no avail. The hypothesis is even part of the Clay Mathematics Institute's Millenium Prize Problems, a list of seven unsolved, complex math problems, each with a $1 million reward. While some mathematicians have claimed to solve, or partially solve, this mathematical mystery, it remains unconquerable to this day.
Marty Parks, math expert, holds a BA in Mathematics and an MS in Electrical Engineering. Let's hear his thoughts on this unique problem.




Solving the Riemann Hypothesis would greatly deepen humanity's understanding of prime numbers and would likely attract more mathematicians to do research, but most practical applications that involve prime numbers (in cryptography) can already assume that the hypothesis is true if they need to use it for something. The primary challenge is the fact that mathematicians simply don't have the right tools developed to handle the job. Because the problem uses several seemingly disparate parts of mathematics, finding an adequate reformulation of the problem to work with the current tools mathematicians have access to seems to be one of the biggest stumbling blocks to solving the Riemann Hypothesis.



2. Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture
The Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture is an influential and complex problem in number theory that focuses on elliptic curves. The conjecture connects the number of rational solutions (points where both coordinates are rational numbers) on an elliptic curve with certain characteristics of an L-function associated with the curve. Essentially, it predicts that the behavior of this L-function at a specific value can indicate whether the curve has a finite or infinite number of rational points. This conjecture is notoriously tricky due to its deep connections with various complex mathematical concepts, such as L-functions, elliptic curves, and modular forms.
Impact of Solution
The resolution of this conjecture would have large implications in several areas of mathematics, particularly in number theory and algebraic geometry. It would increase our understanding of elliptic curves, which are central to many mathematical fields, including cryptography, and could lead to advancements in digital security and new encryption technologies.
Progress
While there has been significant progress in understanding specific cases and aspects of the conjecture, general proof or disproof remains distant. The conjecture forms part of the Langlands program, which aims to unify different areas of mathematics. Advances within this program have shed some light on the conjecture, but a complete solution is still pending.
Math expert Marty Parks' comments on the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture




The Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture deals with elliptic curves in number theory, and these types of problems tend to require a lot of advanced 'machinery' to even begin approaching a basic understanding of it. In terms of difficulties faced in trying to solve this problem, the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture suffers from many of the same issues that the Riemann Hypothesis suffers from. It's likely that some incredibly advanced techniques will be necessary to find a solution. If solved, there are many other math theorems in number theory that would also be solved since they use assumptions from this theorem.



 
For more detailed analysis and discussions, you can refer to the Canadian Journal of Mathematics, and Kazuma Morita's academic journal "Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture in the complex multiplication case and the congruent number problem'. 
3. Hodge Conjecture
The Hodge Conjecture, formulated by William Hodge in 1941, deals with algebraic geometry. It suggests a fundamental relationship between collections of simpler geometric pieces, known as algebraic cycles, and complicated shapes of certain "nice" spaces, known as projective algebraic varieties. The Hodge Conjecture asserts that these algebraic cycles can approximate the shapes of these varieties. Put simply, solving this problem is like fitting together the pieces of a very complex, abstract jigsaw puzzle. The difficulty of the Hodge Conjecture is exceptionally high due to its complex nature and deep connections with various mathematical fields. It requires a sophisticated understanding of algebraic geometry, complex geometry, and topology.
Impact of Solution
A solution to the Hodge Conjecture could advance our understanding of mathematical structures in higher dimensions and may have applications in areas like string theory and other parts of theoretical physics. The Hodge Conjecture is also one of the Millennium Prize Problems, with a $1 million prize for a solution.
Progress
While there has been progress in proving the conjecture for specific cases, such as uniruled and certain complete intersection fourfolds, complete proof for more general cases still needs to be provided. The conjecture is true for the following types of fourfolds:

Cubic
Quartic
Quintic

Pursuing complete proof remains one of modern mathematics' most challenging and intriguing problems.
Math expert Marty Parks' comments on the Hodge conjecture:




The Hodge Conjecture is such a hard problem because many types of the structures it references don't really exist, and it's really hard to just create those types of structures (logically, speaking). Since the Hodge problem relates to topology (more specifically cohomotopy), its solution would provide mathematicians better tools to solve related problems in algebraic topology, helping physicists, computer scientists, and even material scientists with new methods to analyze problems related to space (in physics), to network connectivity (in computer science), and analysis of material defects (in material science).



 
You can read more on the Hodge Conjecture here: 'Known cases of the Hodge conjecture". 
4. Navier-Stokes Equations
The Navier-Stokes equations are fundamental in the field of fluid dynamics. These partial differential equations describe and help predict the behavior of fluid substances, like water and air, and embody the principles of conservation of momentum and mass in fluid flow. The difficulty in solving the Navier-Stokes equations lies in their complex nature and the intricate behavior of fluid flow they describe. The equations are non-linear, meaning traditional methods developed in mathematics for solving linear equations cannot be used to solve these equations, and more advanced and complicated methods must be used instead.
Impact of Solution
A complete understanding of the Navier-Stokes equations, particularly regarding the global regularity problem, would revolutionize fluid dynamics. It could lead to significant advancements in meteorology, aerodynamics, and other fields that rely on fluid flow modeling. A solution could also have profound implications for mathematical theory and provide insights into complex systems and partial differential equations.
Since the equations are essential for modeling a wide range of natural phenomena, their solution could also solve for natural phenomena, including atmospheric and oceanic flows, and are various engineering applications.
Progress
Mathematicians have researched the Navier-Stokes problem at length, and though some have claimed to find partial solutions to the equations, a conclusive answer to this complex problem has yet to be found. However, mathematician Mukhtarbay Otelbayev, a member of the Kazakh Science Academy and Director of the Eurasian Mathematics Institute at the Eurasian National University (ENU), has claimed to solve the equations. His findings are currently being translated from Russian into English, so the validity of his solution can be further explored. Until then, the equations remain unsolved and are included in the Millenium Prize Problems.
Math expert Marty Parks' comments on the Navier-Stokes equations:




It's hard to believe that we still don't have a great understanding of turbulence and how fluids flow. However, mathematicians have many special-case solutions to the Navier-Stokes Equations; they just involve a ton of computation. To find a more elegant (less computationally intensive) way to solve these equations would mean that a whole world of other problems in the realm of engineering, optimization, and generally anything that is 'non-linear' in its form would also gain solutions. But the difficulty in solving Navier-Stokes Equations stems from our methods for solving partial differential equations with non-linear terms, which are pretty limited at the moment.



 
For more detailed discussions, you can explore further through these sources: Nature Reviews Physics and an academic paper titled 'Self-attenuation of extreme events in Navier-Stokes turbulence" as found on Nature Communications. 
5. Yang-Mills Existence and Mass Gap
The Yang-Mills Existence and Mass Gap problem is a central question in theoretical physics, particularly in quantum field theory and gauge theory. It involves the Yang-Mills fields, which are a cornerstone in our understanding of the fundamental forces in particle physics. The problem is to prove that for any compact, simple gauge group G, a non-trivial quantum Yang-Mills theory exists on R ^ 4 and has a mass gap ? > 0.
The mass gap refers to the gap in energy between the vacuum and the lowest energy state. The existence of this gap is essential in explaining why the strong force, which holds atomic nuclei together, is short-ranged. The Yang-Mills Existence and Mass Gap problem is incredibly challenging due to its complicated nature and its unique position at the intersection of mathematics and theoretical physics.
Impact of Solution
A solution to this problem would have great implications for both physics and mathematics. In physics, it would solidify the foundation of the Standard Model of particle physics, particularly the understanding of the strong force. In mathematics, it would advance our knowledge of quantum field theories and gauge theories and provide insights into complex mathematical structures. The problem is also one of the Millennium Prize Problems, highlighting its significance.
Progress
The mathematical foundation of Yang-Mills theory remains unclear despite its success in physics. Although experiments and computer simulations suggest the existence of a mass gap, theoretical proof is yet to be established.
Math expert Marty Parks' comments on the Yang-Mills Existence and Mass Gap




The Yang-Mills Existence and Mass Gap falls more on the physics side of things than mathematics. It seems like a lot more work needs to be done in particle physics and quantum field theory to stoke initial intuition and inspire a future mathematician or physicist to seek more answers.



 
For a more detailed exploration of this topic, you can refer to sources such as 'The mass gap and gluon confinement' and Clay Mathematics Institute.
6. P vs NP Problem
The P vs NP problem is central to theoretical computer science. It explores whether every problem whose solution can be quickly verified (NP) can also be solved quickly (P). To put it simply, P represents a class of problems that can be solved easily by computers, while NP encompasses problems whose solutions, if given, can be quickly verified. The crux of the issue lies in determining if these two classes are the same. The difficulty of the P vs NP problem is exceptionally high due to its abstract nature and broad implications across computer science and requires a deep understanding of algorithmic efficiency and computational theory, as well as an innovative approach to bridge the gap between these problem classes.
Impact of Solution
Resolving the P vs NP problem has enormous implications across various fields, including cryptography, algorithm design, and computational complexity. If P equals NP, it implies many complex problems have efficient solutions. This would revolutionize fields like data analysis, encryption, and logistics. Conversely, proving P does not equal NP would affirm the inherent complexity of certain problems, which is fundamental in areas like internet security and encryption algorithms.
Progress
Despite extensive research and numerous attempts, the P vs NP problem still needs to be solved. The problem's complexity and foundational nature in computer science make it one of the Millennium Prize Problems, with a $1 million prize for a proven solution. It continues to be a driving force for research in computational theory and mathematics.
Math expert Marty Parks' comments on the P vs NP Problem:




The P vs NP Problem is super interesting. The underlying question relates to whether a problem whose solution is easy to verify should also be easy to solve. There are many methods of encryption in internet security that depend on a bad actor not being able to solve 'very hard problems.' If it turns out that P = NP, then it opens the possibility of finding potentially easier ways for a hacker to solve these "very hard problems."The main reason the P = NP problem gives mathematicians and computer scientists so much trouble is that the current way of doing mathematics and thinking about mathematical proofs is simply not compatible with this particular question. Mathematicians can't use any of the most common methods of proving a statement to analyze this problem, which is what makes it so difficult.



 
For more detailed insights and discussions, you can explore further through MIT News and P versus NP problem - Science topic page on ResearchGate.
7. Collatz Conjecture
The Collatz Conjecture, also known as the 3n+1 problem, is a captivating problem in mathematics due to its simplicity. It states that by starting with any positive integer and following a simple iterative process (if the number is even, divide it by two; if it is odd, triple it and add one), you will eventually reach the number 1. Despite its straightforward formulation, the conjecture has remained unsolved and is notorious for the seemingly chaotic behavior exhibited by the numbers as they eventually converge to 1.
The difficulty of the Collatz Conjecture lies in its unpredictable nature. The sequence generated by the simple iterative process can take various routes before eventually reaching 1, making it challenging to establish a general proof. This problem is a classic example of how a simple algorithm can lead to complex and seemingly random behavior and pose a significant challenge to mathematicians.
Impact of Solution
Solving the Collatz Conjecture would give us a greater understanding of how simple rules can produce complex and unpredictable behavior in number sequences. It would also contribute to the field of dynamical systems, a branch of mathematics dealing with systems that evolve according to specific rules. The solution would have implications in areas where similar patterns are observed, such as computer science and theoretical physics.
Progress
There have been numerous attempts to prove the conjecture, with strategies ranging from mathematical induction to algebraic and probabilistic approaches. One approach involves examining the properties and behaviors of Collatz sequences using structures like Algebraic Inverse Trees, which offer a new perspective for tackling the problem. Another method explores the probabilistic aspects of the sequences generated by the Collatz function. This method observes patterns and symmetries in the distribution of these numbers. But a definitive proof or disproof of the conjecture remains elusive.
Math expert Marty Parks' comments on the Collatz Conjecture:




The Collatz Conjecture is a fun one because it illuminates how little we really know about math. You have a very simple recipe to follow: 1. Pick any whole number bigger than 0. 2. Divide it by 2 if its even, or times it by 3 and add 1 if its odd. So far we end up at the number 1 no matter where we start -- and no one knows why! Like most of the biggest unsolved problems in mathematics, the difficulty with the Collatz Conjecture is that the tools needed to tackle the problem still need to be developed. This very simple problem is so far beyond the reach of what our current math allows to do that it will be very exciting to see how future mathematicians (or AI) will develop completely unheard-of methods to help find a proof.



 
For further exploration of the Collatz Conjecture, you can refer to the detailed discussions in these sources: "A New Approach on Proving Collatz Conjecture", The Collatz Conjecture: A New Proof using Algebraic Inverse Trees, and On the Probabilistic Proof of the Convergence of the Collatz Conjecture.
 
 









The math expert featured in this article is Marty Parks. He has a Bachelor of Science in statistics, a Bachelor of Arts in mathematics, and a Master of Science in electrical engineering from the University of Florida. He's worked as a teaching assistant for math and physics professors, researched control systems, tutored college students, and taught high school physics and AP Computer Science.








×











Download the app




























Plans

Student Solutions
Teacher Solutions
Study.com for Schools
Working Scholars® Solutions



About Us

Blog
Careers
Teach For Us
Press Center
Ambassador
Scholarships





Support

Contact Support
FAQ
Site Feedback



Download the app
























Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community








©  Copyright 2024 Study.com.
			All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
			All rights reserved.
		





Terms of Use  
Privacy Policy  
DMCA Notice  
ADA Compliance  
Honor Code For Students







			Support
		











×








