












The Manhattan Project Timeline
















































 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 








Menu












Home








 Science, Tech, Math



 Science
 

 Math
 

 Social Sciences
 

 Computer Science
 

 Animals & Nature
 



 Humanities



 History & Culture
 

 Visual Arts
 

 Literature
 

 English
 

 Geography
 

 Philosophy
 

 Issues
 



 Languages



 English as a Second Language
 

 Spanish
 

 French
 

 German
 

 Italian
 

 Japanese
 

 Mandarin
 

 Russian
 



 Resources



 For Students & Parents
 

 For Educators
 

 For Adult Learners
 



About Us





Search






Close
Search the site


GO













Science, Tech, Math






Science
Math
Social Sciences
Computer Science
Animals & Nature





Humanities






History & Culture
Visual Arts
Literature
English
Geography
Philosophy
Issues





Languages






English as a Second Language
Spanish
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Mandarin
Russian





Resources






For Students & Parents
For Educators
For Adult Learners




About Us
Contact Us
Editorial Guidelines
Privacy Policy
















Humanities
 
›
History & Culture


The Manhattan Project Timeline
































Print















 




View of the radioactive plume from the bomb dropped on Nagasaki City, as seen from 9.6 km away, in Koyagi-jima, Japan, August 9, 1945.
Handout / Getty Images










History & Culture



 Military History






 


World War II






 Battles & Wars






 Key Figures






 Arms & Weapons






 Naval Battles & Warships






 Aerial Battles & Aircraft






 Civil War






 French Revolution






 Vietnam War






 World War I








 American History






 African American History






 African History






 Ancient History and Culture






 Asian History






 European History






 Genealogy






 Inventions






 Latin American History






 Medieval & Renaissance History






 The 20th Century






 Women's History






 View More










By

Martin Kelly



Martin Kelly


History Expert


M.A., History, University of Florida

B.A., History, University of Florida


Martin Kelly, M.A., is a history teacher and curriculum developer. He is the author of "The Everything American Presidents Book" and "Colonial Life: Government."



Learn about our
Editorial Process




Updated on June 02, 2020








The Manhattan Project was a secret research project that was created to help America design and build an atomic bomb. The U.S. launched the project in reaction to the startling fact that Nazi scientists had discovered how to split a uranium atom in 1939.









Read More

Secrets Behind the Atomic Bomb Revealed

By Shelly Schwartz



   Einstein's Letter  

President Franklin Roosevelt was not that concerned when theoretical physicist Albert Einstein first wrote him about the possible consequences of splitting the atom. Einstein had previously discussed his concerns with Enrico Fermi who had escaped from Italy.



However, by 1941 Roosevelt had decided to create a group to research and develop the bomb. The project was given its name due to the fact that at least 10 of the sites used for the research were located in Manhattan. Following is a timeline of the key events related to the development of the atomic bomb and the Manhattan Project. 










Manhattan Project Key Dates




Date
Event
 


1931
Heavy hydrogen or deuterium is discovered by Harold C. Urey.
 


April 14, 1932
The atom is split by John Crockcroft and E.T.S. Walton of Great Britain, thereby proving Einstein's Theory of Relativity.
 


1933
Hungarian physicist Leo Szilard realizes the possibility of the nuclear chain reaction.
 


1934
 Fermi achieves first nuclear fission.
 


1938
The Theory of Nuclear Fission is announced by Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch.
 


Jan. 26, 1939
At a conference at George Washington University, Niels Bohr announces the discovery of fission.
 


Jan. 29,1939
Robert Oppenheimer realizes the military possibilities of nuclear fission.
 


Aug. 2, 1939
Einstein writes to President Roosevelt concerning the use of uranium as a new source of energy leading to the formation of the Committee on Uranium.
 


Sept. 1, 1939
World War II begins.
 


Feb. 23 1941
Plutonium is discovered by Glenn Seaborg , Edwin McMillan, Joseph W. Kennedy, and Arthur Wahl.
 


Oct. 9, 1941
FDR gives the go-ahead for the development of an atomic weapon.
 


Aug. 13,1942
Manhattan Engineering District is established for the purpose of creating an atomic bomb. This would later be called the "Manhattan Project."
 


Sept. 23, 1942
Col. Leslie Groves is placed in charge of the Manhattan Project.  Oppenheimer becomes the project's scientific director.
 


Dec. 2, 1942
Fermi produces the first controlled nuclear fission reaction at the University of Chicago.
 


May 5, 1943
Japan becomes the primary target for any future atomic bomb according to the Military Policy Committee of the Manhattan Project.
 


April 12, 1945
Roosevelt dies. Harry Truman is named the 33rd president of the U.S.
 


April 27, 1945
The Target Committee of the Manhattan Project selects four cities as possible targets for the atomic bomb: Kyoto, Hiroshima, Kokura, and Niigata.
 


May 8, 1945
War ends in Europe.
 


May 25, 1945
Szilard attempts to warn Truman in person concerning the dangers of atomic weapons.
 


July 1, 1945
Szilard begins a petition to get Truman to call off using the atomic bomb in Japan.
 


July 13, 1945
American intelligence discovers the only obstacle to peace with Japan is "unconditional surrender."
 


July 16, 1945
The world's first atomic detonation takes place in the Trinity Test at Alamogordo, New Mexico.
 


July 21, 1945
Truman orders atomic bombs to be used.
 


July 26, 1945
Potsdam Declaration is issued, calling for the '"unconditional surrender of Japan."
 


July 28, 1945
Japan rejects Potsdam Declaration.
 


Aug. 6, 1945
Little Boy, a uranium bomb, is detonated over Hiroshima, Japan. It kills between 90,000 and 100,000 people immediately.
 


Aug. 7, 1945
U.S. decides to drop warning pamphlets on Japanese cities.
 


Aug. 9, 1945
The second atomic bomb to hit Japan, Fat Man, was scheduled to be dropped at Kokura. However, because of poor weather, the target was moved to Nagasaki. Truman addresses the nation.
 


Aug. 10, 1945
U.S. drops warning leaflets concerning another atomic bomb on Nagasaki, the day after the bomb was dropped.
 


Sept. 2, 1945
Japan announces its formal surrender.
 


October 1945
Edward Teller approaches Oppenheimer to aid in the building of a new hydrogen bomb. Oppenheimer refuses.
 









Cite this Article









Format
mla
apa
chicago
Your Citation

Kelly, Martin. "The Manhattan Project Timeline." ThoughtCo, Apr. 5, 2023, thoughtco.com/the-manhattan-project-timeline-4051979.
Kelly, Martin. (2023, April 5). The Manhattan Project Timeline. Retrieved from https://www.thoughtco.com/the-manhattan-project-timeline-4051979
Kelly, Martin. "The Manhattan Project Timeline." ThoughtCo. https://www.thoughtco.com/the-manhattan-project-timeline-4051979 (accessed June 12, 2024).







copy citation




























































































Comparing the Hydrogen Bomb and the Atomic Bomb














Biography of Enrico Fermi














The Manhattan Project and the Invention of the Atomic Bomb














Biography of J. Robert Oppenheimer, Director of the Manhattan Project














Niels Bohr and the Manhattan Project














Leo Szilard, Creator of Manhattan Project, Opposed Use of Atomic Bomb














Biography of Albert Einstein, Theoretical Physicist














Edward Teller and the Hydrogen Bomb



















Hanford Nuclear Bomb Site: Triumph and Disaster














Most Influential Scientists of the 20th Century














Biography of Ernest Lawrence, Inventor of the Cyclotron














Biography of Hans Bethe














Chien-Shiung Wu: A Pioneering Female Physicist














Franklin D. Roosevelt Fast Facts














What Is Nuclear Disarmament?














Albert Einstein Printables















Home







Follow Us


 


 

 


 














Science, Tech, Math



Humanities



Languages



Resources




About Us
Advertise
Careers
Privacy Policy
Editorial Guidelines
Contact
Terms of Service
EU Privacy











ThoughtCo is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.
















We Care About Your PrivacyWe and our 100 partners store and/or access information on a device, such as unique IDs in cookies to process personal data. You may accept or manage your choices by clicking below, including your right to object where legitimate interest is used, or at any time in the privacy policy page. These choices will be signaled to our partners and will not affect browsing data.We and our partners process data to provide:Store and/or access information on a device. Use limited data to select advertising. Create profiles for personalised advertising. Use profiles to select personalised advertising. Create profiles to personalise content. Use profiles to select personalised content. Measure advertising performance. Measure content performance. Understand audiences through statistics or combinations of data from different sources. Develop and improve services. Use limited data to select content. 
List of Partners (vendors)
Accept All Reject All Show Purposes





