








The National Medal of Science 50th Anniversary | National Science Foundation































































An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know


Here's how you know









Official websites use .gov

              A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
            






Secure .gov websites use HTTPS.

              A lock
              (LockLocked padlock)
              or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
              


























              Search
            

Menu












Search
search







Find Funding & Apply





Where to Start




For All Researchers & Educators




For Early-Career Researchers




For Postdoctoral Fellows




For Graduate Students




For Undergraduates




For Entrepreneurs




For Industry






Explore Funding




Search All Opportunities




By Directorate




By Upcoming Due Date




NSF-wide Initiatives




Search Funded Projects (Awards)






How to Apply




Preparing Your Proposal




Submitting Your Proposal




How We Make Funding Decisions




Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG)






Additional Resources




Research.gov




Grants.gov




Baam.nsf.gov




Our Directorates & Offices









Manage Your Award





Guidance For Awardees




Getting Started




Request a Change to Your Award




Report Your Outcomes




Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG)






Additional Resources




Research.gov




NSF Public Access Repository (PAR)




Our Directorates & Offices




Search Funded Projects (Awards)









Focus Areas





Areas We Fund




Arctic & Antarctic




Astronomy & Space




Biology




Chemistry & Materials




Computing




Diversity in STEM




Earth & Environment




Education & Training




Engineering




Facilities & Infrastructure




Mathematics




People & Society




Physics 




Research Partnerships




Technology




Explore all Focus Areas






Additional Resources




Explore Our Impacts




Search Funded Projects (Awards)




NSF by the Numbers




Our Directorates & Offices









News & Events





News




News & Announcements




Science Matters Blog




Multimedia Gallery




For the Press






Events




Upcoming Events




NSF 75th Anniversary




NSF Grants Conference




Electronic Research Administration Forum









About





Learn About NSF




Overview




Our Directorates & Offices




NSF & Congress




Honorary Awards




Visit NSF




Contact Us






Work With NSF




Careers at NSF




Contracting With NSF




Partnering With NSF






Additional Resources




National Science Board




National Center for Science & Engineering Statistics (NCSES)




Documents & Reports




Budget, Performance & Financial Reporting




Staff Directory

























Home





 Email

 Print


 Share
			
















HOME
ABOUT
MEDAL DESIGN
SELECTION PROCESS
AWARDEES
EVENTS
GALLERY
RESOURCES







Richard Feynman (1918-1988) 
 
“I can live with doubt and uncertainty. I think it's much more interesting to live not knowing than to have answers which might be wrong.”
–Richard Feynman


National Medal of Science recipient in 1979 “in recognition of his essential contributions to the quantum theory of radiation and to his illumination of  
      behavior of constituents of the atom, of the atomic nucleus and of the subnuclear particles.”
Richard Feynman was born in Far Rockaway, Queens, N.Y. He often credited his father, Melville, with developing his sense of curiosity and his mother, Lucille, 
      with instilling in him a sense of humor. As a child, Feynman enjoyed introducing scientific concepts to his  younger sister, Joan, who grew up to be a distinguished 
      physicist in her own right.
After excelling in mathematics as a student at Far Rockaway High School, Feynman earned his bachelor’s degree in 1939 from the  Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
      and his Ph.D. from Princeton University three years later. While at Princeton, Feynman was recruited for the theoretical division of the Manhattan Project, the secret 
      U.S. Army laboratory set up in Los Alamos, N.M., for the purpose of developing the atomic bomb.
Feynman was present at the first detonation of an atomic bomb. The  achievement excited him at first, but he ultimately expressed concerns about the implications of 
      the technology. Feynman later developed safer methods for storing radioactive waste, an innovation responsible for saving the lives of many power plant workers.
While Feynman was at Los Alamos, his wife, Arline  Greenbaum, who had suffered health problems throughout their marriage, passed away at the age of 25. Later that 
      year, Feynman accepted a position teaching theoretical physics at Cornell University; he then joined the faculty at the California Institute of Technology (CalTech) 
      five years later, in 1950.
Feynman is best known in the scientific community for his groundbreaking research on quantum electrodynamics, the theory that describes the interaction between light 
      and  matter. The pictorial representations that Feynman used to depict particle interactions have come to be known as “Feynman diagrams,” which are drawn  
      according to “Feynman rules.”
For his work in quantum electrodynamics, Feynman received the Nobel Prize in physics, which he shared with Sin-Itiro Tomonaga and Julian  Scwhinger. The general public 
      received greater exposure to Feynman upon his  appointment to the presidential commission that investigated the Challenger explosion in 1986. With a demonstration using a 
      glass of ice water, Feynman revealed the vulnerability of the rocket booster’s O ring seal when exposed to cold temperatures.
Feynman remained active as a lecturer and researcher until the end of his life. He offered popular undergraduate physics courses at Caltech and was well-known by the 
      student body, often attending freshman  orientation. Feynman pursued a hobby playing bongo drums since his time at Los Alamos, and recorded an audiotape called “Safecracker 
      Suite” of his drumming interspersed with personal stories. Several of Feynman’s lecture  series were published to great public reception, and his 1985 memoirs--“Surely 
      You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!”--became a best-seller.
Feynman passed away from cancer in 1988, survived by his  wife Gweneth Howarth, whom he married in 1960, and their two children. Feynman’s New York Times obituary 
      described him as “arguably the most brilliant, iconoclastic and influential of the postwar generation of theoretical physicists.”






Image descriptions and credits
 
  	Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations presented in this material are only those of the presenter grantee/researcher, author, or 
  	agency employee; and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.


















Top























2415 Eisenhower Ave Alexandria, VA 22314
(703) 292-5111




Sign up for email updates











































Footer



About Us


About NSF


Careers


Our Directorates & Offices


National Science Board


Contact Us




What's New


News & Announcements


Events


Science Matters Blog


Multimedia Gallery




Information For


Funding Seekers


NSF Awardees


Congress 


Media


Educators


Panelists




Resources


Documents & Reports


Budget, Performance & Financial Reporting


Public Access


Stopping Harassment


Research Security


Scientific Integrity


Research.gov















Required Policy Links



Vulnerability disclosure


Inspector General


Privacy


FOIA


No FEAR Act


USA.gov


Accessibility


Plain language


















