














The Best Books By Richard Feynman For Science Lovers | Speechify
































































 














































 
Skip to content















Download now












Welcome!
Enjoy the best audiobooks
experience with Speechify.
Try for free




Text to
Speech



Text to SpeechListen & organize your files in your browser


 iPhone & iPad appListen on the go on your Apple devices


Chrome extensionListen to Google docs, web articles, Gmail, Twitter, and more


Android appListen on the go on your Android device


Mac appListen everywhere on your computer


PDF ReaderA PDF Reader that Reads Out Loud


Edge Add-onTurn text into natural sounding voice in Microsoft Edge



TTS for EducationTalk to sales & request a free demo
TTS for BusinessTalk to sales & request a free demo




AI Voice
Generator



Al Voice OverConvert your content into a voice over and download it as an .MP3, .OGG, or .WAV file


Voice CloningCreate high quality Al clones of human voices within seconds.


Al DubbingAutomatically translate and dub new or existing videos in over 100's of languages with Al video dubbing.


TranscriptionEasily, and quickly, transcribe any video. Get the most accurate transcription in over 20 languages.


Al AvatarLaptop, browser, action. Create Al generated videos in minutes.


 Text to Speech APIThe most natural sounding text to speech API on the market.


Voice Over Studio for BusinessTalk to sales & request a free demo




Teams



SMBs to Enterprise


Text to Speech for Business


Voice Over Studio for Business






Education



For Administrators &
Teachers


Text to Speech for Schools


Text to speech for Disabled Students Allowance


Text to speech for NYC public schools






About



Company


Our Story


Reviews


Contact


Blog


Pricing




Learn


Audiobooks


Best text to speech online


How text to speech helps an Individualized
Education
Program


Text to speech tools to address ADHD
challenges


Text-to-speech WAV file


Best AI voice generators. The Ultimate
List


The top 5 best text to speech apps


Voice changer


Read my paper out loud


Text to speech on Amazon


Text to Speech on Apple Devices


Alternatives to Google Cloud Text to
Speech


Alternatives to Google WaveNet


Best text to speech apps for Android


Brandon Sanderson audiobooks


Text to speech Google Docs


Alternatives to FakeYou text to
speech


Everything you need to know about text to speech
on
TikTok


Girl voice changer


The best alternatives to Synthesia.io


Robotic text to speech


Female voice changer


Download audio


Celebrity voice-over generator


How to have your PDF read out loud


5 apps that read out text


The top female text to speech voices


How to get celebrity voices with text to
speech


Deepfake voice


How to convert a PDF to speech









Log in
Try for free











Home
Blog
The best books by Richard Feynman for science lovers














Browse








EXPERT CHOICES

 Elon Musk
 Bill Gates
 Nelson Mandela
 Brené Brown
 Stephen King
 Tim Ferriss
 JK Rowling
 Oprah Winfrey
 Barack Obama
 Joe Rogan
See All



BEST BOOKS FOR

#BookTok
Biographies
Erotica
Health & Wellness
History
Money & Finance
Mystery
Mystery Thriller & Suspense
Personal Development
Politics & Social Sciences
Relationships
Romance
Science Fiction & Fantasy
Startups & Business & Careers
Teen & Young Adult
Thriller & Suspense













The best books by Richard Feynman for science lovers 






Speechify cuts your reading time in half. Let Speechify text to speech read to you.


Try for free

Trusted by 25M+ students & professionals.




Listen to Samples



Plus over 200 more high quality voices.

















Table of Contents












The best books by Richard Feynman for science lovers
Finding the right books to satiate your scientific curiosity doesn’t have to be a challenge. Simply turn to books by Nobel Prize-winning scientist Richard Feynman. During the 20th century, his insights into the laws of physics changed the course of science forever.
Richard Feynman’s books are influential and brilliant takes on theoretical physics and sometimes not-so-easy pieces on quantum mechanics. It’s no surprise he has a Nobel Prize in physics. Not only that, but the legendary theorist of relativity Albert Einstein attended Feynman’s seminar.
In this article, you can learn about the best books by the physicist Richard P. Feynman.
Who was Richard Feynman?
The famous theoretical physicist. Richard Feynman was born in New York, on May 11, 1918, and died on February 15, 1988.
Feynman studied physics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and eventually received his Ph.D. from Princeton.
During World War II, Feynman became part of the theoretical division of the Manhattan Project. He was the youngest member in his division that helped create the atomic bomb in Los Alamos. He also contributed by making a formula for explosive energetic yield and improved the computing aspects of the project.
After the war, he continued his career as a professor at Cornell University, before switching to CalTech where he spent the rest of his career as a professor of theoretical physics.
Feynman made contributions to the scientific standpoint of waves and particles. He completely changed the way science perceives them. His theory began with quantum electrodynamics. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in physics, along with two other co-winners, for his work on light.
Feynman was famous for his Feynman diagrams which simplified the calculations of certain particles acting with each other. Feynman made other strides in the world of quantum physics as well.
The best Richard Feynman books
Below, you can find some of the best books by Richard Feynman. Not all of his books are on this list such as the Feynman Lectures on Computation, Feynman’s Tips on Physics, or  Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman. The list has something for everyone.
Feynman collaborated with many other scientists in the writing of these books, such as Freeman Dyson, who is mentioned below in certain lectures.
Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! 
Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! is full of situations and meaningful glimpses of the life of the award-winning physicist. Most of them come from conversations that were recorded with Feynman’s very close friend Ralph Leighton. It was also a best seller when published in 1985.
This is a great book if you want to further explore the life of Richard Feynman and who he was as a person.
The Feynman Lectures on Physics
The Feynman Lectures on Physics is a set of three volumes that cover the basics of physics, from classical mechanics to quantum mechanics and space-time, as well as advanced topics such as relativity and thermodynamics.
What Do You Care What Other People Think? Further Adventures of a Curious Character
What Do You Care What Other People Think? is a collection of personal anecdotes and reflections by the renowned physicist Richard Feynman. It covers a wide range of topics, from his work on the U.S. Space Shuttle program prior to the space shuttle Challenger disaster, to his experiences as a bongo-playing hobbyist. It recalls when he held lectures on BBC.
It’s good if you want a closer look at Richard Feynman’s life.
Six Easy Pieces
Six Easy Pieces is a collection of six lectures that Feynman gave on basic concepts in physics, including atoms, energy, and quantum mechanics. It was co-authored with his colleague Robert B. Leighton. The book is a great introduction to physics for anyone interested in the subject, from high school students to curious adults.
Perfectly Reasonable Deviations from the Beaten Track
This book is a collection of letters, speeches, and other writings by Feynman that were not originally intended for publication. If you are interested in Feynman’s life and work, or in the history of science in the 20th century, you would enjoy this book.
QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter
QED is a popular science book that explains quantum electrodynamics (QED), the theory that describes the behavior of light and matter at a fundamental level.
The book is aimed at a general audience and requires no advanced mathematical knowledge. Anyone interested in the weird and wonderful world of quantum mechanics, or the history of physics, would enjoy this book.
The Pleasure of Finding Things Out: The Best Short Works of Richard P. Feynman
This is the perfect book to explore a wide range of topics that Richard Feynman spoke about. It contains speeches, interviews, and even lectures. Here, Feynman touches upon the Challenger disaster and working with the space shuttle.
The book does still contain important aspects of quantum physics but also offers a wider perspective of Feynman’s life.
The Character of Physical Law
The Character of Physical Law is a collection of seven lectures that Feynman gave at Cornell University in 1964. The lectures cover a wide range of topics in physics, from the laws of gravitation to the behavior of subatomic particles.
The book is aimed at a general audience and requires no advanced mathematical knowledge and is for anyone who has an interest in science.
The Meaning of it All
Feynman was first and foremost a scientist. As a scientist and a man, he also expressed interest and curiosity about the surrounding world. The Meaning of it All covers a three-part lecture. It took place at the University of Washington in 1963.
It covers many topics, including religion and science, as well as more controversial topics at the time. This is for the reader more interested in Feynman’s life as well as a wider scope of topics.
Discover the work of Richard P. Feynman on Speechify Audiobooks
Maybe you prefer to read science books on the go. Speechify offers a selection of science audiobooks, as well as books by Richard P. Feynman.
With Speechify, you can select your audiobook from a wide range of titles. Not only that, but you can also adjust the speed, take notes, and bookmark pages to maximize your productivity.
Try Richard P. Feynman books to quench your thirst for knowledge.
FAQ
Which Feynman books should I read first?
While you don’t need to read them in a particular order, you can start with the simplest book titles first. These include Feynman’s Tips on Physics, The Meaning of it All, and Pleasure of Finding Things Out. 
What is Richard Feynman best known for?
Richard Feynman is best known for his contributions to theoretical physics, particularly in the areas of quantum mechanics and particle physics such as path integrals.
What was Richard Feynman’s IQ?
Surprisingly, despite being one of the most influential scientists of his error, Richard Feynman scored 125–high average–on an IQ test according to his biographer James Gleick.
How many languages did Feynman speak?
Feynman spoke English, some Spanish, and Portuguese. He also knew some of the basics of German and a little Japanese.
What is one of Feynman’s best quotes?
One of the best quotes by Richard Feynman would be: “You must not fool yourself, and you are the easiest person to fool.”
What is Feynman’s most famous book?
Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! would be both a great place to start and his most famous book.
What was Feynman like as a person?
Many have described Feynman as a bit of a loner. He liked to work on multiple problems mostly by himself and alone. Often, he would do the work in which he was most interested. He preferred to do things for himself rather than rely on other people.








 Previous

Here are the best books by Andy Weir




Next 




What are the best books about the Scientific Revolution?






Cliff Weitzman
Cliff Weitzman is a dyslexia advocate and the CEO and founder of Speechify, the #1 text-to-speech app in the world, totaling over 100,000 5-star reviews and ranking first place in the App Store for the News & Magazines category. In 2017, Weitzman was named to the Forbes 30 under 30 list for his work making the internet more accessible to people with learning disabilities. Cliff Weitzman has been featured in EdSurge, Inc., PC Mag, Entrepreneur, Mashable, among other leading outlets.









By Cliff Weitzman


Dyslexia & Accessibility Advocate, CEO/Founder of Speechify
Dyslexia & Accessibility Advocate, CEO/Founder of Speechify

in Best Books
on February 27, 2023


Recent Blogs







July 06, 2023
Which books are available on Spotify?









July 06, 2023
Are audiobooks free on Spotify with membership?









June 25, 2023
Top Destinations for Free eBooks and Audiobooks Online









June 25, 2023
Best Alternative to Barnes & Noble Online









June 25, 2023
The Best Places to Buy eBooks: Beyond the Kindle Ecosystem









June 25, 2023
What are the best places to find free ebooks?









June 25, 2023
Best Independent Companies to Buy eBooks from









April 19, 2023
How many Game of Thrones books are there?









April 19, 2023
Where to buy cheap books: A comprehensive guide









April 19, 2023
How many Jack Reacher books are there?









April 19, 2023
How many FNAF books are there?









April 19, 2023
How many Warrior Cats books are there?









April 19, 2023
How many Wheel of Time books are there?









April 19, 2023
The best Vampire Survivors powerups in order









April 19, 2023
How to read the Robert Galbraith books in order









April 19, 2023
How to read the Artemis Fowl books in order









April 19, 2023
How to read Craig Johnson’s books in order









April 19, 2023
How to read Cassandra Clare’s books in order









April 19, 2023
How to read Lee Child’s books in order









April 18, 2023
How to read the In Death book series in order









April 18, 2023
Best book quotes









April 18, 2023
A tale of two cities reviewed









April 18, 2023
All the President’s Men reviewed









April 18, 2023
Tintin reviewed









April 18, 2023
What are adult coloring books?









April 18, 2023
How to read the Percy Jackson books in order









April 11, 2023
How to find charities for the blind









April 11, 2023
What is the best Bible app









April 11, 2023
Where to find free audio Bible downloads









April 11, 2023
What is the best free Bible app









More in this series


16 Best Gardening Books


19 Best Specific Ingredients Books


26 Best Military & Wars, Juvenile Nonfiction Books


Here are the best books by Laura Wright


14 Best Popular Culture, History Books


29 Best Healthy Living Books


17 Best Special Forces, History Books


29 Best 20th Century, Juvenile Fiction Books


Books recommended by Devon Sawa


29 Best Devotional Books


29 Best Pastoral Resources, Religion Books


29 Best Workplace Culture Books


10 Best Job Hunting Books


13 Best Disasters & Disaster Relief Books


24 Best Conflict Resolution Books


15 Best Individual Artists Books


29 Best Intelligence & Espionage Books


10 Best Child, Family & Relationships Books


12 Best Religious, History Books


29 Best Death, Grief, Bereavement, Religion Books


22 Best Gay & Lesbian , Juvenile Fiction Books


11 Best Camping & Outdoor Activities Books


11 Best Peer Pressure Books


29 Best Motherhood Books


29 Best Personal Memoirs, Family & Relationships Books


11 Best Essays, Science Books


29 Best History & Surveys Books


29 Best Cultural Heritage Books


29 Best General, Business & Economics Books


29 Best Science & Technology, Juvenile Fiction Books






















Products



Text to speech online




Text to speech for business




Text to speech for schools




Text to speech for iOS




Text to speech Chrome extension




Text to speech for Android




Text to Speech API




Microsoft Edge TTS Add-on




Audiobooks




Audiobooks for business & schools




AI Voice Over




Voice Cloning




AI Dubbing




AI Voice Generator




AI Video Generator




Transcription




PDF Reader




Speaking time calculator







Company



About




Contact




Blog




Careers




Affiliates




Help




Status




Privacy




Press




Brand Kit




Terms & Conditions




Refund Policy




Sitemap

















Recommended reading

 5 apps that read out text 
 How to have your PDF read aloud 
 Celebrity voice-over generator 
 PDF audio reader 
 6 top PDF to audio converter apps to use in 2023 
 Voice over generator for PowerPoint 
 Best screen readers to help you read the screen of your computer or phone 
 Read aloud text 
 Obama text to speech 
 How to convert a PDF to speech 
 Text to speech in Powerpoint 
 Discover Chat GPT-4’s text-to-speech capabilities 
 Audio textbooks for college students 
 Best AI voice generators. The Ultimate List 
 Deepfake voice 
 6 Best PDF Text to Speech Apps for Android 
 Top Speechify Alternatives of 2023 
 Voice over generator for YouTube videos 
 Read to me: Make your devices read aloud 
 How to get celebrity voices with text to speech 
 Text to speech to MP3 
 Is Speechify free for students? 
 Generate voice 
 Photo text to speech 
 How to make videos with AI voice overs 
 How to use text-to-speech for Google Docs 
 Text to audio converter: Speechify 
 Best text to speech apps for Android 
 Trump voice generator: Best AI voice changers to sound like Trump 
 The best PDF readers in 2023 
 Turn any book into an audiobook
 Eleven Labs Alternative
 Synthesia Alternative






Made with ❤️ around the 🌍 | @ Speechify Inc 2024
English




Book Sitemap

All
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 E 
 F 
 G 
 H 
 I 
 J 
 K 
 L 
 M 
 N 
 O 
 P 
 Q 
 R 
 S 
 T 
 U 
 V 
 W 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 



Category Sitemap

All
 0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 E 
 F 
 G 
 H 
 I 
 J 
 K 
 L 
 M 
 N 
 O 
 P 
 Q 
 R 
 S 
 T 
 U 
 V 
 W 
 X 
 Y 
 Z 








×






Chinese (Simplified) (中文 (简体)) 




Chinese (Traditional) (中文 (台灣) ) 




Czech (Čeština) 




Danish (Dansk) 




Dutch (Nederlands) 




English 




Finnish (Suomi) 




French (Français) 




German (Deutsch) 




Hindi (हिन्दी) 




Italian (Italiano) 




Japanese (日本語) 




Korean (한국어) 




Norwegian (Norsk bokmål) 




Polish (Polski) 




Portuguese (Brazil) (Português (Brasil)) 




Russian (Русский) 




Spanish (Español) 




Swedish (Svenska) 




Thai (ภาษาไทย) 




Turkish (Türkçe) 













Only available on iPhone and iPad
To access our catalog of 100,000+ audiobooks, you need to use an iOS device.
Coming to Android soon...

I have an iPhone or iPad
Join the Android waitlist













Join the waitlist
Enter your email and we will notify you as soon as Speechify Audiobooks is available for you.



Enter your email-id here
Email-id is invalid













You’re in!
You’ve been added to the waitlist. We will notify you as soon as Speechify Audiobooks is available for you.

Continue exploring






 














