










The Challenger Disaster – Richard Feynman


















































							Richard Feynman						

Scientist. Teacher. Raconteur. Musician


Menu
Close
Science

The Feynman Lectures
Feynman Diagrams Decoded
What is Science?
Nanotechnology: There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom
QED Lectures in New Zealand
The Challenger Disaster
The Water Sprinkler Experiment
The Mysterious 137
Lecture on Likelihood
Feynman Symposium at University of South Carolina (2010)
Modern Science Writing
Trieste Feynman Festival – 1998


Life

Biography
Obituary
Feynman on the America’s Cup
The Smartest Man In The World
Ayesha Arora’s Favorite Feynman Quotes
Poem For RPF


Memoirs

Al Seckel on Feynman
Astrology and Feynman
David Adler on Feynman
Feynman’s Rainbow
Frankie Evans on Feynman
Hagen Kleinert on Feynman
Mario J Pinheiro on Feynman
John & Mary Gribbin on Feynman
Lawrence Krauss on Feynman
Marc Turner on Feynman
Mario J Pinheiro on Feynman
Roger M. Boisjoly on Feynman
Srinivasan and Feynman
Wes Boudville on Feynman
Winang’s Feynman Story


Fun

Fun with Physics
Tuva

Tuva or Bust!
Friends of Tuva
Feynman Visits Tuva!


Stamps

The Feynman Stamp
Richard Feynman Commemorative Cancel
Fantasy Stamps
Feynman Stamp — First Day Covers


The Art Of Richard Feynman
Far Rockaway House
The Feynman Van
The Painting of the Feynman Van
Cartoons

Feynman in Monty
Feynman in Tom The Dancing Bug
Feynman in Alley Oop


Quotes
QED, The Play
Feynman Place in Munich
Shuttlecraft Feynman on Star Trek
Think Different
Richard Feynman Coloring Page
Richard Feynman Appears In an Italian Restaurant in Osaka
Heiroglyphics in the Mayan Style in Honor of Feynman
Ambigrams


Links

The Feynman Lectures On Physics – Info
The Feynman Lectures – The Books
Friends of Tuva
Kongar-ol Ondar


News

Archive of News Items


Contact

Contact
Follow us on Twitter
Our news feed


 








The Challenger Disaster







Challenger on the launchpad



Arrow indicating leaking O-ring on SRB




After the space shuttle Challenger and its crew were destroyed in a fiery, catastrophic explosion on January 28, 1986, NASA appointed members of the Rogers Commission to investigate the cause of the disaster.  When he was asked to be a part of this commission, Feynman rather reluctantly accepted.  Little did he know that he would be the one person to discover the exact cause of the explosion.
Feynman was always the inquisitive type; he had to have the facts.  To find out what happened to the shuttle, he went straight to the people who put the shuttle together.  He learned many things from these people that would help him to discover the cause of the explosion; and also information that helped him realize what a risky business flying a shuttle really is.  NASA officials said that the chance of failure of the shuttle was about 1 in 100,000;  Feynman found that this number was actually closer to 1 in 100.  He also learned that rubber used to seal the solid rocket booster joints using O-rings, failed to expand when the temperature was at or below 32 degrees F (0 degrees C).  The temperature at the time of the Challenger liftoff was 32 degrees F.

Feynman’s famous C-clamp experiment
Feynman now believed that he had the solution, but to test it, he dropped a piece of the O-ring material, squeezed with a C-clamp to simulate the actual conditions of the shuttle, into a glass of ice water.  Ice, of course, is 32 degrees F.  At this point one needs to understand exactly what role the O-rings play in the solid rocket booster (SRB) joints.  When the material in the SRB start to heat up, it expands and pushes against the sides of the SRB.  If there is an opening in a joint in the SRB, the gas tries to escape through that opening (think of it like water in a tea kettle escaping through the spout.)  This leak in the Challenger’s SRB was easily visible as a small flicker in a launch photo.  This flicker turned into a flame and began heating the fuel tank, which then ruptured. When this happened, the fuel tank released liquid hydrogen into the atmosphere where it exploded.
As Feynman explained, because the O-rings cannot expand in 32 degree weather, the gas finds gaps in the joints, which led to the explosion of the booster and then the shuttle itself.
Read a recollection of Feynman by Roger M. Boisjoly.
Read Feynman’s Personal Observations on the Reliability of the Shuttle.





 Recent Posts 

On this anniversary…


Radiolab episode featuring Richard Feynman


Thoughts on Feynman’s 102nd Birthday


Tuvans Commemorate Feynman’s 101st Birthday at Feynman Rock


Feynman’s 100th Birthday Celebration in Tuva


 







Search for:




 Portions of this site copyright (c) 1997-2016 Friends of Tuva
 

 
 






				© 2024 Richard Feynman. All rights reserved.
			

Hiero by aThemes
			






