



Theory of relativity - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Create account

Log in








Personal tools





 Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Development and acceptance








2
Special relativity








3
General relativity








4
Experimental evidence




Toggle Experimental evidence subsection





4.1
Tests of special relativity








4.2
Tests of general relativity










5
Modern applications








6
See also








7
References








8
Further reading








9
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Theory of relativity



109 languages




AfrikaansAlemannischAnarâškielâअंगिकाالعربيةঅসমীয়াAsturianuAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهBasa Baliবাংলা閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяभोजपुरीБългарскиBosanskiCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaDanskالدارجةDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGalego한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKabɩyɛಕನ್ನಡქართულიҚазақшаKiswahiliKriyòl gwiyannenLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLingua Franca NovaMagyarМакедонскиമലയാളംमराठीمصرىBahasa MelayuМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsनेपाली日本語NordfriiskNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNovialOccitanOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀPatoisភាសាខ្មែរPolskiPortuguêsRipoarischRomânăRumantschRuna SimiРусскийSeelterskShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaதமிழ்TaclḥitతెలుగుไทยTürkçeTürkmençeУкраїнськаاردوVènetoTiếng ViệtWinaray吴语ייִדיש粵語Zazaki中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadView sourceView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadView sourceView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikibooksWikiquoteWikisource





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide











From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Two interrelated physics theories by Albert Einstein
This article is about the scientific concept. For philosophical or ontological theories about relativity, see Relativism. For the silent film, see The Einstein Theory of Relativity.


Video simulation of the merger GW150914, showing spacetime distortion from gravity as the black holes orbit and merge
The theory of relativity usually encompasses two interrelated physics theories by Albert Einstein: special relativity and general relativity, proposed and published in 1905 and 1915, respectively.[1] Special relativity applies to all physical phenomena in the absence of gravity. General relativity explains the law of gravitation and its relation to the forces of nature.[2] It applies to the cosmological and astrophysical realm, including astronomy.[3]
The theory transformed theoretical physics and astronomy during the 20th century, superseding a 200-year-old theory of mechanics created primarily by Isaac Newton.[3][4][5] It introduced concepts including 4-dimensional spacetime as a unified entity of space and time, relativity of simultaneity, kinematic and gravitational time dilation, and length contraction. In the field of physics, relativity improved the science of elementary particles and their fundamental interactions, along with ushering in the nuclear age. With relativity, cosmology and astrophysics predicted extraordinary astronomical phenomena such as neutron stars, black holes, and gravitational waves.[3][4][5]


Development and acceptance
Main articles: History of special relativity and History of general relativity
General relativity




G

μ
ν


+
Λ

g

μ
ν


=

κ


T

μ
ν




{\displaystyle G_{\mu \nu }+\Lambda g_{\mu \nu }={\kappa }T_{\mu \nu }}


Introduction
HistoryTimelineTests
Mathematical formulation

Fundamental concepts
Equivalence principle
Special relativity
World line
Pseudo-Riemannian manifold

Phenomena
Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational redshift
Gravitational time dilation
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole

Spacetime
Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge


EquationsFormalisms
Equations
Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein

Formalisms
ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian

Advanced theory
Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity


Solutions
Schwarzschild (interior)
Reissner–Nordström
Einstein–Rosen waves
Wormhole
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kerr–Newman–de Sitter
Kasner
Lemaître–Tolman
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
Oppenheimer–Snyder
pp-wave
van Stockum dust
Weyl−Lewis−Papapetrou
Hartle–Thorne

Scientists
Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedman
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Oppenheimer
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Raychaudhuri
Taylor
Hulse
van Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
others

 Physics portal
 Categoryvte
Albert Einstein published the theory of special relativity in 1905, building on many theoretical results and empirical findings obtained by Albert A. Michelson, Hendrik Lorentz, Henri Poincaré and others. Max Planck, Hermann Minkowski and others did subsequent work.
Einstein developed general relativity between 1907 and 1915, with contributions by many others after 1915. The final form of general relativity was published in 1916.[3]
The term "theory of relativity" was based on the expression "relative theory" (German: Relativtheorie) used in 1906 by Planck, who emphasized how the theory uses the principle of relativity. In the discussion section of the same paper, Alfred Bucherer used for the first time the expression "theory of relativity" (German: Relativitätstheorie).[6][7]
By the 1920s, the physics community understood and accepted special relativity.[8] It rapidly became a significant and necessary tool for theorists and experimentalists in the new fields of atomic physics, nuclear physics, and quantum mechanics.
By comparison, general relativity did not appear to be as useful, beyond making minor corrections to predictions of Newtonian gravitation theory.[3] It seemed to offer little potential for experimental test, as most of its assertions were on an astronomical scale. Its mathematics seemed difficult and fully understandable only by a small number of people. Around 1960, general relativity became central to physics and astronomy. New mathematical techniques to apply to general relativity streamlined calculations and made its concepts more easily visualized. As astronomical phenomena were discovered, such as quasars (1963), the 3-kelvin microwave background radiation (1965), pulsars (1967), and the first black hole candidates (1981),[3] the theory explained their attributes, and measurement of them further confirmed the theory.

Special relativity
Main article: Special relativity
Special relativity is a theory of the structure of spacetime. It was introduced in Einstein's 1905 paper "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies" (for the contributions of many other physicists and mathematicians, see History of special relativity). Special relativity is based on two postulates which are contradictory in classical mechanics:

The laws of physics are the same for all observers in any inertial frame of reference relative to one another (principle of relativity).
The speed of light in vacuum is the same for all observers, regardless of their relative motion or of the motion of the light source.
The resultant theory copes with experiment better than classical mechanics. For instance, postulate 2 explains the results of the Michelson–Morley experiment. Moreover, the theory has many surprising and counterintuitive consequences. Some of these are:

Relativity of simultaneity: Two events, simultaneous for one observer, may not be simultaneous for another observer if the observers are in relative motion.
Time dilation: Moving clocks are measured to tick more slowly than an observer's "stationary" clock.
Length contraction: Objects are measured to be shortened in the direction that they are moving with respect to the observer.
Maximum speed is finite: No physical object, message or field line can travel faster than the speed of light in vacuum.
The effect of gravity can only travel through space at the speed of light, not faster or instantaneously.
Mass–energy equivalence: E = mc2, energy and mass are equivalent and transmutable.
Relativistic mass, idea used by some researchers.[9]
The defining feature of special relativity is the replacement of the Galilean transformations of classical mechanics by the Lorentz transformations. (See Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism.)

General relativity
Main articles: General relativity and Introduction to general relativity
General relativity is a theory of gravitation developed by Einstein in the years 1907–1915. The development of general relativity began with the equivalence principle, under which the states of accelerated motion and being at rest in a gravitational field (for example, when standing on the surface of the Earth) are physically identical. The upshot of this is that free fall is inertial motion: an object in free fall is falling because that is how objects move when there is no force being exerted on them, instead of this being due to the force of gravity as is the case in classical mechanics. This is incompatible with classical mechanics and special relativity because in those theories inertially moving objects cannot accelerate with respect to each other, but objects in free fall do so. To resolve this difficulty Einstein first proposed that spacetime is curved. Einstein discussed his idea with mathematician Marcel Grossmann and they concluded that general relativity could be formulated in the context of Riemannian geometry which had been developed in the 1800s.[10]
In 1915, he devised the Einstein field equations which relate the curvature of spacetime with the mass, energy, and any momentum within it.
Some of the consequences of general relativity are:

Gravitational time dilation: Clocks run slower in deeper gravitational wells.[11]
Precession: Orbits precess in a way unexpected in Newton's theory of gravity. (This has been observed in the orbit of Mercury and in binary pulsars).
Light deflection: Rays of light bend in the presence of a gravitational field.
Frame-dragging: Rotating masses "drag along" the spacetime around them.
Expansion of the universe: The universe is expanding, and certain components within the universe can accelerate the expansion.
Technically, general relativity is a theory of gravitation whose defining feature is its use of the Einstein field equations. The solutions of the field equations are metric tensors which define the topology of the spacetime and how objects move inertially.

Experimental evidence
Einstein stated that the theory of relativity belongs to a class of "principle-theories". As such, it employs an analytic method, which means that the elements of this theory are not based on hypothesis but on empirical discovery. By observing natural processes, we understand their general characteristics, devise mathematical models to describe what we observed, and by analytical means we deduce the necessary conditions that have to be satisfied. Measurement of separate events must satisfy these conditions and match the theory's conclusions.[2]

Tests of special relativity
Main article: Tests of special relativity
A diagram of the Michelson–Morley experiment
Relativity is a falsifiable theory: It makes predictions that can be tested by experiment. In the case of special relativity, these include the principle of relativity, the constancy of the speed of light, and time dilation.[12] The predictions of special relativity have been confirmed in numerous tests since Einstein published his paper in 1905, but three experiments conducted between 1881 and 1938 were critical to its validation. These are the Michelson–Morley experiment, the Kennedy–Thorndike experiment, and the Ives–Stilwell experiment. Einstein derived the Lorentz transformations from first principles in 1905, but these three experiments allow the transformations to be induced from experimental evidence.
Maxwell's equations—the foundation of classical electromagnetism—describe light as a wave that moves with a characteristic velocity. The modern view is that light needs no medium of transmission, but Maxwell and his contemporaries were convinced that light waves were propagated in a medium, analogous to sound propagating in air, and ripples propagating on the surface of a pond. This hypothetical medium was called the luminiferous aether, at rest relative to the "fixed stars" and through which the Earth moves. Fresnel's partial ether dragging hypothesis ruled out the measurement of first-order (v/c) effects, and although observations of second-order effects (v2/c2) were possible in principle, Maxwell thought they were too small to be detected with then-current technology.[13][14]
The Michelson–Morley experiment was designed to detect second-order effects of the "aether wind"—the motion of the aether relative to the earth. Michelson designed an instrument called the Michelson interferometer to accomplish this. The apparatus was sufficiently accurate to detect the expected effects, but he obtained a null result when the first experiment was conducted in 1881,[15] and again in 1887.[16] Although the failure to detect an aether wind was a disappointment, the results were accepted by the scientific community.[14] In an attempt to salvage the aether paradigm, FitzGerald and Lorentz independently created an ad hoc hypothesis in which the length of material bodies changes according to their motion through the aether.[17] This was the origin of FitzGerald–Lorentz contraction, and their hypothesis had no theoretical basis. The interpretation of the null result of the Michelson–Morley experiment is that the round-trip travel time for light is isotropic (independent of direction), but the result alone is not enough to discount the theory of the aether or validate the predictions of special relativity.[18][19]

The Kennedy–Thorndike experiment shown with interference fringes.
While the Michelson–Morley experiment showed that the velocity of light is isotropic, it said nothing about how the magnitude of the velocity changed (if at all) in different inertial frames. The Kennedy–Thorndike experiment was designed to do that, and was first performed in 1932 by Roy Kennedy and Edward Thorndike.[20] They obtained a null result, and concluded that "there is no effect ... unless the velocity of the solar system in space is no more than about half that of the earth in its orbit".[19][21] That possibility was thought to be too coincidental to provide an acceptable explanation, so from the null result of their experiment it was concluded that the round-trip time for light is the same in all inertial reference frames.[18][19]
The Ives–Stilwell experiment was carried out by Herbert Ives and G.R. Stilwell first in 1938[22] and with better accuracy in 1941.[23] It was designed to test the transverse Doppler effect –  the redshift of light from a moving source in a direction perpendicular to its velocity—which had been predicted by Einstein in 1905. The strategy was to compare observed Doppler shifts with what was predicted by classical theory, and look for a Lorentz factor correction. Such a correction was observed, from which was concluded that the frequency of a moving atomic clock is altered according to special relativity.[18][19]
Those classic experiments have been repeated many times with increased precision. Other experiments include, for instance, relativistic energy and momentum increase at high velocities, experimental testing of time dilation, and modern searches for Lorentz violations.

Tests of general relativity
Main article: Tests of general relativity
General relativity has also been confirmed many times, the classic experiments being the perihelion precession of Mercury's orbit, the deflection of light by the Sun, and the gravitational redshift of light. Other tests confirmed the equivalence principle and frame dragging.

Modern applications
Far from being simply of theoretical interest, relativistic effects are important practical engineering concerns. Satellite-based measurement needs to take into account relativistic effects, as each satellite is in motion relative to an Earth-bound user, and is thus in a different frame of reference under the theory of relativity. Global positioning systems such as GPS, GLONASS, and Galileo, must account for all of the relativistic effects in order to work with precision, such as the consequences of the Earth's gravitational field.[24] This is also the case in the high-precision measurement of time.[25] Instruments ranging from electron microscopes to particle accelerators would not work if relativistic considerations were omitted.[26]

See also
Doubly special relativity
Galilean invariance
General relativity references
Special relativity references
References


^ Einstein A. (1916), Relativity: The Special and General Theory  (Translation 1920), New York: H. Holt and Company

^ a b Einstein, Albert (28 November 1919). "Time, Space, and Gravitation" . The Times.

^ a b c d e f 
Will, Clifford M (2010). "Relativity". Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 21 May 2020. Retrieved 1 August 2010.

^ a b 
Will, Clifford M (2010). "Space-Time Continuum". Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia. Retrieved 1 August 2010.[permanent dead link]

^ a b 
Will, Clifford M (2010). "Fitzgerald–Lorentz contraction". Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 25 January 2013. Retrieved 1 August 2010.

^ Planck, Max (1906), "Die Kaufmannschen Messungen der Ablenkbarkeit der β-Strahlen in ihrer Bedeutung für die Dynamik der Elektronen (The Measurements of Kaufmann on the Deflectability of β-Rays in their Importance for the Dynamics of the Electrons)" , Physikalische Zeitschrift, 7: 753–761

^ Miller, Arthur I. (1981), Albert Einstein's special theory of relativity. Emergence (1905) and early interpretation (1905–1911), Reading: Addison–Wesley, ISBN 978-0-201-04679-3

^ Hey, Anthony J.G.; Walters, Patrick (2003). The New Quantum Universe (illustrated, revised ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 227. Bibcode:2003nqu..book.....H. ISBN 978-0-521-56457-1.

^ Greene, Brian. "The Theory of Relativity, Then and Now". Retrieved 26 September 2015.

^ Einstein, A.; Grossmann, M. (1913). "Entwurf einer verallgemeinerten Relativitätstheorie und einer Theorie der Gravitation" [Outline of a Generalized Theory of Relativity and of a Theory of Gravitation]. Zeitschrift für Mathematik und Physik. 62: 225–261.

^ 
Feynman, Richard Phillips; Morínigo, Fernando B.; Wagner, William; Pines, David; Hatfield, Brian (2002). Feynman Lectures on Gravitation. West view Press. p. 68. ISBN 978-0-8133-4038-8.[permanent dead link], Lecture 5

^ Roberts, T; Schleif, S; Dlugosz, JM, eds. (2007). "What is the experimental basis of Special Relativity?". Usenet Physics FAQ. University of California, Riverside. Retrieved 31 October 2010.

^ Maxwell, James Clerk (1880), "On a Possible Mode of Detecting a Motion of the Solar System through the Luminiferous Ether" , Nature, 21 (535): 314–315, Bibcode:1880Natur..21S.314., doi:10.1038/021314c0

^ a b Pais, Abraham (1982). "Subtle is the Lord ...": The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (1st ed.). Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. pp. 111–113. ISBN 978-0-19-280672-7.

^ Michelson, Albert A. (1881). "The Relative Motion of the Earth and the Luminiferous Ether" . American Journal of Science. 22 (128): 120–129. Bibcode:1881AmJS...22..120M. doi:10.2475/ajs.s3-22.128.120. S2CID 130423116.

^ Michelson, Albert A. & Morley, Edward W. (1887). "On the Relative Motion of the Earth and the Luminiferous Ether" . American Journal of Science. 34 (203): 333–345. Bibcode:1887AmJS...34..333M. doi:10.2475/ajs.s3-34.203.333. S2CID 124333204.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ Pais, Abraham (1982). "Subtle is the Lord ...": The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (1st ed.). Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. p. 122. ISBN 978-0-19-280672-7.

^ a b c Robertson, H.P. (July 1949). "Postulate versus Observation in the Special Theory of Relativity" (PDF). Reviews of Modern Physics. 21 (3): 378–382. Bibcode:1949RvMP...21..378R. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.21.378.

^ a b c d Taylor, Edwin F.; John Archibald Wheeler (1992). Spacetime physics: Introduction to Special Relativity (2nd ed.). New York: W.H. Freeman. pp. 84–88. ISBN 978-0-7167-2327-1.

^ Kennedy, R.J.; Thorndike, E.M. (1932). "Experimental Establishment of the Relativity of Time" (PDF). Physical Review. 42 (3): 400–418. Bibcode:1932PhRv...42..400K. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.42.400. S2CID 121519138. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2020.

^ Robertson, H.P. (July 1949). "Postulate versus Observation in the Special Theory of Relativity" (PDF). Reviews of Modern Physics. 21 (3): 381. Bibcode:1949RvMP...21..378R. doi:10.1103/revmodphys.21.378.

^ Ives, H.E.; Stilwell, G.R. (1938). "An experimental study of the rate of a moving atomic clock". Journal of the Optical Society of America. 28 (7): 215. Bibcode:1938JOSA...28..215I. doi:10.1364/JOSA.28.000215.

^ Ives, H.E.; Stilwell, G.R. (1941). "An experimental study of the rate of a moving atomic clock. II". Journal of the Optical Society of America. 31 (5): 369. Bibcode:1941JOSA...31..369I. doi:10.1364/JOSA.31.000369.

^ Ashby, N. Relativity in the Global Positioning System. Living Rev. Relativ. 6, 1 (2003). doi:10.12942/lrr-2003-1"Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 November 2015. Retrieved 9 December 2015.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ Francis, S.; B. Ramsey; S. Stein; Leitner, J.; Moreau, J.M.; Burns, R.; Nelson, R.A.; Bartholomew, T.R.; Gifford, A. (2002). "Timekeeping and Time Dissemination in a Distributed Space-Based Clock Ensemble" (PDF). Proceedings 34th Annual Precise Time and Time Interval (PTTI) Systems and Applications Meeting: 201–214. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 February 2013. Retrieved 14 April 2013.

^ Hey, Tony; Hey, Anthony J. G.; Walters, Patrick (1997). Einstein's Mirror (illustrated ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. x (preface). ISBN 978-0-521-43532-1.


Further reading

Einstein, Albert (2005). Relativity: The Special and General Theory. Translated by Robert W. Lawson (The masterpiece science ed.). New York: Pi Press. ISBN 978-0-13-186261-6.
Einstein, Albert (1920). Relativity: The Special and General Theory (PDF). Henry Holt and Company.
Einstein, Albert; trans. Schilpp; Paul Arthur (1979). Albert Einstein, Autobiographical Notes (A Centennial ed.). La Salle, Illinois: Open Court Publishing Co. ISBN 978-0-87548-352-8.
Einstein, Albert (2009). Einstein's Essays in Science. Translated by Alan Harris (Dover ed.). Mineola, New York: Dover Publications. ISBN 978-0-486-47011-5.
Einstein, Albert (1956) [1922]. The Meaning of Relativity (5 ed.). Princeton University Press.
The Meaning of Relativity Albert Einstein: Four lectures delivered at Princeton University, May 1921
How I created the theory of relativity Albert Einstein, December 14, 1922; Physics Today August 1982
Relativity Sidney Perkowitz Encyclopædia Britannica

External links



Wikiquote has quotations related to Theory of relativity.




Wikisource has original works on the topic: Relativity




Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Relativity: The Special and General Theory




Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Category:Relativity




Wikiversity has learning resources about General relativity

Theory of relativity at Curlie
 The dictionary definition of theory of relativity at Wiktionary
 Media related to Theory of relativity at Wikimedia Commons
vteRelativitySpecialrelativityBackground
Principle of relativity (Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation)
Special relativity
Doubly special relativity
Fundamentalconcepts
Frame of reference
Speed of light
Hyperbolic orthogonality
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations
Proper length
Proper time
Proper acceleration
Relativistic mass
Formulation
Lorentz transformation
Phenomena
Time dilation
Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc2)
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Terrell rotation
Spacetime
Light cone
World line
Minkowski diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space
GeneralrelativityBackground
Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Fundamentalconcepts
Equivalence principle
Riemannian geometry
Penrose diagram
Geodesics
Mach's principle
Formulation
ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Raychaudhuri equation
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation
Ernst equation
Phenomena
Black hole
Event horizon
Singularity
Two-body problem
Gravitational waves: astronomy
detectors (LIGO and collaboration
Virgo
LISA Pathfinder
GEO)
Hulse–Taylor binary
Other tests: precession of Mercury
lensing (together with Einstein cross and Einstein rings)
redshift
Shapiro delay
frame-dragging / geodetic effect (Lense–Thirring precession)
pulsar timing arrays
Advancedtheories
Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Quantum gravity
Solutions
Cosmological: Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker (Friedmann equations)
Lemaître–Tolman
Kasner
BKL singularity
Gödel
Milne
Spherical: Schwarzschild (interior
Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff equation)
Reissner–Nordström
Axisymmetric: Kerr (Kerr–Newman)
Weyl−Lewis−Papapetrou
Taub–NUT
van Stockum dust
discs
Others: pp-wave
Ozsváth–Schücking
Alcubierre
In computational physics: Numerical relativity
Scientists
Poincaré
Lorentz
Einstein
Hilbert
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Weyl
Eddington
Friedmann
Lemaître
Milne
Robertson
Chandrasekhar
Zwicky
Wheeler
Choquet-Bruhat
Kerr
Zel'dovich
Novikov
Ehlers
Geroch
Penrose
Hawking
Taylor
Hulse
Bondi
Misner
Yau
Thorne
Weiss
others
 Category
vteAlbert EinsteinPhysics
Theory of relativity
Special relativity
General relativity
Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc2)
Brownian motion
Photoelectric effect
Einstein coefficients
Einstein solid
Equivalence principle
Einstein field equations
Einstein radius
Einstein relation (kinetic theory)
Cosmological constant
Bose–Einstein condensate
Bose–Einstein statistics
Bose–Einstein correlations
Einstein–Cartan theory
Einstein–Infeld–Hoffmann equations
Einstein–de Haas effect
EPR paradox
Bohr–Einstein debates
Teleparallelism
Thought experiments
Unsuccessful investigations
Wave–particle duality
Gravitational wave
Tea leaf paradox
Works
Annus mirabilis papers (1905)
"Investigations on the Theory of Brownian Movement" (1905)
Relativity: The Special and the General Theory (1916)
The Meaning of Relativity (1922)
The World as I See It (1934)
The Evolution of Physics (1938)
"Why Socialism?" (1949)
Russell–Einstein Manifesto (1955)
In popularculture
Die Grundlagen der Einsteinschen Relativitäts-Theorie (1922 documentary)
The Einstein Theory of Relativity (1923 documentary)
Relics: Einstein's Brain (1994 documentary)
Insignificance (1985 film)
Picasso at the Lapin Agile (1993 play)
I.Q. (1994 film)
Einstein's Gift (2003 play)
Einstein and Eddington (2008 TV film)
Genius (2017 series)
Oppenheimer (2023 film)
Prizes
Albert Einstein Award
Albert Einstein Medal
Kalinga Prize
Albert Einstein Peace Prize
Albert Einstein World Award of Science
Einstein Prize for Laser Science
Einstein Prize (APS)
Books aboutEinstein
Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel
Einstein and Religion
Einstein for Beginners
Einstein: His Life and Universe
Einstein's Cosmos
I Am Albert Einstein
Introducing Relativity
Subtle is the Lord
Family
Mileva Marić (first wife)
Elsa Einstein (second wife; cousin)
Lieserl Einstein (daughter)
Hans Albert Einstein (son)
Pauline Koch (mother)
Hermann Einstein (father)
Maja Einstein (sister)
Eduard Einstein (son)
Robert Einstein (cousin)
Bernhard Caesar Einstein (grandson)
Evelyn Einstein (granddaughter)
Thomas Martin Einstein (great-grandson)
Siegbert Einstein (distant cousin)
Related
Awards and honors
Brain
House
Memorial
Political views
Religious views
Things named after
Albert Einstein Archives
Einstein's Blackboard
Einstein Papers Project
Einstein refrigerator
Einsteinhaus
Einsteinium
Max Talmey

 Category

vteMajor branches of physicsDivisions
Pure
Applied
Engineering
Approaches
Experimental
Theoretical
Computational
Classical
Classical mechanics
Newtonian
Analytical
Celestial
Continuum
Acoustics
Classical electromagnetism
Classical optics
Ray
Wave
Thermodynamics
Statistical
Non-equilibrium
Modern
Relativistic mechanics
Special
General
Nuclear physics
Quantum mechanics
Particle physics
Atomic, molecular, and optical physics
Atomic
Molecular
Modern optics
Condensed matter physics
Interdisciplinary
Astrophysics
Atmospheric physics
Biophysics
Chemical physics
Geophysics
Materials science
Mathematical physics
Medical physics
Ocean physics
Quantum information science
Related
History of physics
Nobel Prize in Physics
Philosophy of physics
Physics education
Timeline of physics discoveries

vteTimeKey concepts
Past
Present
Future
Eternity
Measurementand standardsChronometry
UTC
UT
TAI
Unit of time
Orders of magnitude (time)
Measurementsystems
Italian six-hour clock
Thai six-hour clock
12-hour clock
24-hour clock
Relative hour
Daylight saving time
Chinese
Decimal
Hexadecimal
Hindu
Metric
Roman
Sidereal
Solar
Time zone
Calendars
Main types
Solar
Lunar
Lunisolar
Gregorian
Julian
Hebrew
Islamic
Solar Hijri
Chinese
Hindu Panchang
Maya
List
Clocks
Main types
astronomical
astrarium
atomic
quantum
hourglass
marine
sundial
watch
mechanical
stopwatch
water-based
Cuckoo clock
Digital clock
Grandfather clock
History
Timeline
ChronologyHistory
Astronomical chronology
Big History
Calendar era
Deep time
Periodization
Regnal year
Timeline
Philosophy of time
A series and B series
B-theory of time
Chronocentrism
Duration
Endurantism
Eternal return
Eternalism
Event
Perdurantism
Presentism
Temporal finitism
Temporal parts
The Unreality of Time
ReligionMythology
Ages of Man
Destiny
Immortality
Dreamtime
Kāla
Time and fate deities
Father Time
Wheel of time
Kalachakra
Human experienceand use of time
Chronemics
Generation time
Mental chronometry
Music
tempo
time signature
Rosy retrospection
Tense–aspect–mood
Time management
Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow
Time in scienceGeology
Geological time
age
chron
eon
epoch
era
period
Geochronology
Geological history of Earth
Physics
Absolute space and time
Arrow of time
Chronon
Coordinate time
Instant
Proper time
Spacetime
Theory of relativity
Time domain
Time translation symmetry
Time reversal symmetry
Other fields
Chronological dating
Chronobiology
Circadian rhythms
Clock reaction
Glottochronology
Time geography
Related
Leap year
Memory
Moment
Space
System time
Tempus fugit
Time capsule
Time immemorial
Time travel

 Category
 Commons

vteTime measurement and standards
Chronometry
Orders of magnitude
Metrology
International standards
Coordinated Universal Time
offset
UT
ΔT
DUT1
International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service
ISO 31-1
ISO 8601
International Atomic Time
12-hour clock
24-hour clock
Barycentric Coordinate Time
Barycentric Dynamical Time
Civil time
Daylight saving time
Geocentric Coordinate Time
International Date Line
IERS Reference Meridian
Leap second
Solar time
Terrestrial Time
Time zone
180th meridian
Obsolete standards
Ephemeris time
Greenwich Mean Time
Prime meridian
Time in physics
Absolute space and time
Spacetime
Chronon
Continuous signal
Coordinate time
Cosmological decade
Discrete time and continuous time
Proper time
Theory of relativity
Time dilation
Gravitational time dilation
Time domain
Time-translation symmetry
T-symmetry
Horology
Clock
Astrarium
Atomic clock
Complication
History of timekeeping devices
Hourglass
Marine chronometer
Marine sandglass
Radio clock
Watch
stopwatch
Water clock
Sundial
Dialing scales
Equation of time
History of sundials
Sundial markup schema
Calendar
Gregorian
Hebrew
Hindu
Holocene
Islamic (lunar Hijri)
Julian
Solar Hijri
Astronomical
Dominical letter
Epact
Equinox
Intercalation
Julian day
Leap year
Lunar
Lunisolar
Solar
Solstice
Tropical year
Weekday determination
Weekday names
Archaeology and geology
Chronological dating
Geologic time scale
International Commission on Stratigraphy
Astronomical chronology
Galactic year
Nuclear timescale
Precession
Sidereal time
Other units of time
Instant
Flick
Shake
Jiffy
Second
Minute
Moment
Hour
Day
Week
Fortnight
Month
Year
Olympiad
Lustrum
Decade
Century
Saeculum
Millennium
Related topics
Chronology
Duration
music
Mental chronometry
Decimal time
Metric time
System time
Time metrology
Time value of money
Timekeeper

Portals: Physics Astronomy Stars Outer space Solar System Science
Authority control databases National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theory_of_relativity&oldid=1211615915"
Categories: Theory of relativityAlbert EinsteinTheoretical physicsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from March 2022Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with dead external links from January 2023CS1 maint: multiple names: authors listCS1 maint: archived copy as titleArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse dmy dates from July 2022Articles containing German-language textArticles with Curlie linksCommons category link is on WikidataArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNFdata identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with EMU identifiersArticles containing video clips






 This page was last edited on 3 March 2024, at 14:12 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view


















