
















Top 10 Famous Indian Mathematicians and Their Contributions

























 

































 





















Search for:



 















 June 12, 2024







 









 



 

 Engineering

 JEE Advanced
 JEE Main


 Medical

 Board Exam

 CBSE


 Foundation

 Olympiad

 Olympiad Exams
 Maths Olympiad

 International Maths Olympiad (IMO)
 Pre RMO Olympiad (PRMO)

 Science Olympiad

 National Science Olympiad (NSO)



 NV Sir

 EXAM

 JEE Main

 JEE Main 2024 Dates
 JEE Main Application Form 2024
 JEE Main Eligibility Criteria 2024
 JEE Main Exam Pattern 2024
 JEE Main 2024 Syllabus
 JEE Main 2024 Admit Card
 JEE Main 2024 Answer Key
 JEE Main Rank Predictor 2024
 JEE Main 2024 Result
 JEE Main 2024 Cut off
 JEE Main FAQs 2024
 JEE Main PYQs
 JEE Main 2024 Important Topics

 JEE Advanced

 JEE Advanced 2024 Dates
 JEE Advanced 2024 Application Form
 JEE Advanced Exam Pattern 2024
 JEE Advanced Admit Card 2024
 JEE Advanced 2024 Syllabus
 JEE Advanced Answer Key 2024
 JEE Advanced Rank Predictor 2024
 JEE Advanced 2024 Result
 JEE Advanced PYQs

 NEET

 NEET 2024 Exam Dates
 NEET 2024 Application
 NEET Eligibility Criteria 2024
 NEET Exam Pattern 2024
 NEET Syllabus 2024
 NEET Admit Card 2024
 NEET Answer Key 2024
 NEET Rank Predictor 2024

 NEET 2024 Rank Predictor

 NEET College Predictor 2024
 NEET 2024 Result
 NEET FAQs 2024
 NEET PYQs



 Motion Home

 




























Home  LATEST ARTICLE  List of Top 10 Most Famous Indian Mathematicians and Their Contributions



LATEST ARTICLE
Success Story



List of Top 10 Most Famous Indian Mathematicians and Their Contributions




			By			Himanshu Goyal

Posted on March 11, 2024
31 min read
0


2474


			463,223		









Share on Facebook





Share on Twitter





Share on Google+





Share on Reddit





Share on Pinterest





Share on Linkedin





Share on Tumblr







 
Most Famous Indian Mathematicians and Their Contributions
Most Famous Indian Mathematicians and Their Contributions



Many of you may find Mathematics confusing, while others love (fall in love meaning and origin) playing with numbers. However, no matter if you like or dislike maths, it plays an essential role in our everyday things. But you know there numerous Indian mathematicians who have received recognition from all around the globe. Can you think of any Indian mathematicians names? If you can’t, then after reading this article, you will always remember the great mathematicians of India. Here is the list of famous Indian mathematicians with pictures and names for you all.



Highlights

Here is a list of the Great Indian Mathematicians and Their Contributions1. Srinivasa Ramanujan2. Bhaskara IRead More: Which stream to select after 10th class3. Aryabhatta4. Brahmagupta5. P.C. Mahalanobis6. Satyendra Nath Bose7. D R Kaprekar8. Shakuntala Devi9. Mahavira10. Narendra Karmarkar11. C.R.Rao12. Harish Chandra13. Ashutosh Mukherjee14. Ganesh PrasadList of Famous Female Mathematicians of IndiaFamous Indian Mathematicians and their InventionsList of the Best Mathematicians in the WorldWant to read full blogComments
Here is a list of the Great Indian Mathematicians and Their Contributions
1. Srinivasa Ramanujan

1887 born, Srinivasa Ramanujan was a splendid Indian mathematician who gets credited even today for his commitments in the field of maths. Srinivasa Ramanujan mathematician was an astoundingly brilliant child who might dominate different kids of his age in maths. He belonged from Tamil Nadu, where his family was not well enough to support his passion for Mathematics.
George S. Carr’s book, ‘Synopsis of elementary results in pure mathematics, became his inspiration to follow his passion. Today, Ramanujan mathematician, remembered for inventions of important equations, the infinite series of π, and game theory. The year 1914 was the defining moment in the striving life of the virtuoso mathematician. G.H.Hardy, the great mathematician, invited him to Cambridge. In 1916, he was granted his PhD by the institution. Ramanujan died at an early age because of Tuberculosis in 1920. Although the great mathematician Ramanujan deceased at a young age, he is one of the top 5 Indian mathematicians.

2. Bhaskara I

Bhaskara, the 7th-century famous Indian mathematician, was born in c.600 and died in CE 680. He is one of the ancient Indian mathematicians who is known for his contribution to maths. Bhaskara mathematician is famous for inventing the Hindu decimal system. This Aryabhata follower wrote a critique, ‘Aryabhatiyabhasya’ in CE 629, which is considered the oldest known Sanskrit language work in the mathematics & astronomy field. In addition, his other works include Mahabhaskariya and Laghubhāskarīya.
Mahabhaskariya comprises 8 chapters, dwelling on mathematical astronomy. The book discusses the relationship between cosine and sine and gives the sin x approximation formula. The book likewise examines about longitudes of the planets, conjunctions of the planets with one another and with eclipses of the sun & the moon, shining stars, the lunar crescent, risings and settings. Furthermore, the book explains the relationship between the sine of a point >90° >180° or >270° to the sine of a point <90°. Pell Equation ( 8x² + 1 = y² ) is given by Bhaskara I. Brahmagupta and Bhaskara I are the two great mathematicians of Ancient India.
Read More: Which stream to select after 10th class
3. Aryabhatta

476-550 CE, the golden period of India in which Aryabhatta, the scientist, astronomer and mathematician, lived. Aryabhatta, Indian mathematician’s contributions include the discovery of the spherical shape of the earth, the number of days in 1 year and notable works are Aryabhatasiddhanta and Aryabhatiya. The former work is lost, and Aryabhatiya has three sections. These sections are:

Ganita (Mathematics): This section has the names of the first 10 decimal places and provides algorithms for finding cube and square roots through decimals. In this second, he noticed the second-order sine difference and sine numbers are proportional. Aryabhatta is known for involving one of the two strategies for making the table of sines by utilizing the Pythagorean hypothesis.
Kala-kriya (Time Calculations): Aryabhata examines cosmology like planetary movements, meanings of different units of time (race against time phrase meaning) so forth.
Gola (Sphere): In this section, the mathematician used trigonometry for spherical geometry.

4. Brahmagupta

7th-century Rajasthan astronomer and mathematician, Brahmagupta is famous for his work Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta.’ The book is related to the use of 0 as a number in calculations. A large portion of his works was in the Sanskrit language. Brahmagupta, mathematician of Ancient India, also known as Bhillamalacarya, is recognized for his contribution to Arithematics, Trigonometry (Sine Table and Interpolation formula), and solutions to general linear equation, Brahmagupta’s Theorem and Brahmagupta’s Formula. Brahmagupta couldn’t finish the utilization of 0 in calculations with respect to division; however, he offered calculations, for example, (1 + 0 = 1; 1 – 0 = 1; and 1 x 0 =0), for utilizing the digit 0. The reason why he is known as the best mathematician in the world is the discovery of negative numbers and their calculations. Further, the establishment of √10 (3.162277) by Brahmagupta gave new dimensions to trigonometry and geometry.
5. P.C. Mahalanobis

In the list of the famous Indian mathematicians, P.C.Mahalanobis is one of them. In 1893, he was born in Kolkata. Mahalanobis completed his graduation from Presidency College in Physics and went to Cambridge for higher education in Physics and Mathematics. He is known as a Mathematician, Scientist and Statistician, and also an Indian Father of Statistics. In the year 1913, he was one of the people who contributed to the foundation of Indian Statistical Institute (ISI) in India. His contribution to the forming of Planning Commission of India is unquestionable, and in 1926, he laid the establishment of Hirakund Dam in Odisha on Mahanadi river. One of his best-known works is D2-statistic or Mahalanobis Distance. This distance is the measurement proportion of correlation between two distinct data sets.
6. Satyendra Nath Bose

S.N.Bose, famously known for Bose-Einstein Condensate, is among the top 10 mathematicians of India. Satyendra Nath Bose was an Indian mathematician and physicist who worked with Albert Einstein on the Bose-Einstein Condensate project. Among the Indian mathematicians’ names, Bose is one such who was felicitated with Padma Vibhushan. Bose is also referred to as the ‘Father of the God Particles’ for his contribution to Boson particle. Boson particle is also known as the God particle.
The best mathematician in India, S.N.Bose was born in Kolkata in 1894 and completed his graduation and post-graduation, majoring in mathematics. From his school day, he outperformed every year till his M.Sc. In 1915, he completed his master’s and decided to pursue higher education in 1917. During this tenure, Bose and his batchmate started translating French and German works of Albert Einstein, after getting the green flag from Einstein. Untill 1924, Planck’s Law was not proved, but this year, Bose published a paper deriving Planck’s Theory: quantum radiation law without referring to any classical physics theories. This publishing made him famous among the great mathematicians of world. Even Einstein was impressed by Bose’s work, and he translated the same into German language and was sent to European Physic Journal with Einstein’s recommendation. He died in 1974, but before that, he held several prestigious positions, including presidentship and adviser at the National Institute of Science and Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, respectively.
7. D R Kaprekar

In 1905, famous with the name ‘Ganitananda’, a future Indian mathematician was born; he was Dattathreya Ramchandra Kaprekar. In 1927, he won the Wrangler R. P. Paranjpe Mathematical Prize for his notable work in the field of mathematics. After graduating from the University of Mumbai in 1929, he started teaching in Nashik school. During his period of imparting lessons at a school, Kaprekar persistently published covering various topics like magic squares, recurring decimals and integers having special properties. The number 6174 is called Kaprekar Constant and is named after him. Kaprekar described numerous classes of natural numbers.
8. Shakuntala Devi

When asked for any female mathematicians of India, Shakuntala Devi is one name that is always on the list of the top 10 Indian mathematicians. A charismatic lady from India is recognized for her exceptional calculating speed. For this reason, she got the title of the ‘human computer.’ She was born in 1929 in Banglore. Her journey was a bit different from other famous Indian mathematicians. Shakuntala Devi, a mathematician, started her journey from memorizing cards for the show in the circuses to getting her name into the Guinness Book of World Record.
Her father acknowledged her talent, and later the entire world shouted out loud for her accomplishments. This Indian mathematician’s biography inspires and elates the motivation of everyone who thrives to do wonders as a mathematician.
9. Mahavira

In the list of Indian mathematicians, 9th-century mathematician, Mahavira is the one who is known for setting mathematics and astrology apart. He was mainly famous in the Southern region of India, and his work helped many other South Indian mathematicians to refer. He was the first Indian mathematician in the world who explained the fact that square roots don’t exist in the case of negative numbers. His work ‘Ganitasarasangraha’ includes various mathematical procedures. These vary from basic operations to miscellaneous problems of linear and quadratic equations, mixed problems, proportionality-based rule of 3, geometric calculations and reduction of fractions.
Mahavira mathematician is also known for his contribution to naming the concepts of a semicircle, circle, isosceles triangle, rhombus and equilateral triangle.
10. Narendra Karmarkar

Karmarkar procured his four-year certification in electrical engineering from IIT Bombay and proceeded to seek his PhD in the United States. He is renowned for his contribution to inventing the algorithms of the polynomial. This helped in solving the direct programming queries of linear.
After reading these Indian mathematicians’ names, you will never be able to stay dumbstruck when anyone asks Indian mathematicians and their contributions. Moreover, you will find all mathematicians’ photos with names so that in the future the changes to get confused will be a cypher.
11. C.R.Rao

Indian Mathematician, an influencer in many fields like medicine, economics and demography and the legend of statistics is C.R.Rao. Popular for the ‘Theory of Estimation’, Calyampudi Radhakrishna Rao was born in Karnataka in the year 1879. His father motivated him in the initial stage of his life, which developed Rao’s interest in mathematics. His father bought ‘Problems for Leelavathi’ for him, which comprises mathematics questions. His daily problem-solving practice later made him a famous Indian mathematician. He won Chandrasekara Iyer Scholarship and bagged a gold medal in MD in Statistics in 1943 while studying at Indian Statistical Institute. In 2001, he was felicitated with Padma Vibhushan, and the following year, George W Bush rewarded him with the National Medal of Science.
12. Harish Chandra

Harish Chandra was born in the year 1923 and is known for doing the fundamental work in representation theory. He was an Indian American physicist and mathematician. Among his numerous contributions, semisimple lie groups’ harmonic analysis is the most known. He was honored with Padma Bhusan (1977), Cole Prize (American Mathematical Society) and Srinivasa Ramanujan Medal (Indian National Science Academy).
13. Ashutosh Mukherjee

Ashutosh Mukherjee is another great mathematician of India who identified the talents of famous mathematicians like S.Radhakrishan and C.V.Raman. His contribution broadened the spectrum of maths in India. His notable contributions and numerous research papers in physics and mathematics made him achieve the zenith position in the list of eminent mathematicians. Ashutosh Mukherjee was a part of various national and international academic societies. In 1908, Ashutosh Mukherjee was the founder of the Calcutta Mathematical Society.
14. Ganesh Prasad

Ganesh Prasad, a famous Indian mathematician was born in 1876. Ganesh Prasad’s prominent works include ‘Functions of Bessel and Lame’ and ‘A Treatise for Spherical Harmonics’. He had expertise in the hypothesis of functions of a real variable, theory of potentials, Fourier series and the hypothesis of surfaces. After completing his M.A. and D.Sc. he moved to Cambridge in 1899 to pursue a higher degree. In 1904, he returned to India and initiated the development of the research culture in India. Hence, he is called the ‘father of mathematical research in India’.
List of Famous Female Mathematicians of India
Here is the list of Famous female mathematicians of India you should know:

Raman Parimala
Neena Gupta
Shakuntala Devi
Sujhata Ramdorai
Mangala Narlikar
Vanaja Iyengar
Renuka Ravindra
Ajit Iqbal Singh
T. A. Sarasvati Amma
Bhama Srinivasan

Famous Indian Mathematicians and their Inventions
Here are some of the great mathematicians of India and their inventions:




Mathematicians 
Renowned Works and Inventions


Aryabhata
Formula: (a + b) 2 = a2 + b2 + 2ab


Brahmagupta
Introduction of zero (0)


Srinivasa Ramanujan
Properties of the Partition Function


P.C. Mahalanobis
Mahalanobis Distance


C.R. Rao
Theory of Estimation


D.R. Kaprekar
Devlali numbers, Kaprekar numbers, the Harshad numbers and Demlo numbers.


Harish Chandra
Representation theory, Harmonic analysis on semisimple Lie groups.


Satyendra Nath Bose
Collaboration with Albert Einstein,  Modern theoretical physics in India.


Bhaskara
Declared that any number divided by zero is infinity and that the sum of any number and infinity is also infinity.


Narendra Karmarkar
Karmarkar’s algorithm




List of the Best Mathematicians in the World
Mathematicians from all over the world who have made their contributions in the field of Mathematics are:

Euclid
Pythagoras
Thales of Miletus
Aristotle
Diophantus
Archimedes
Eratosthenes
Hipparchus
Ptolemy
Hero of Alexandria
Xenocrates
Anaxagoras
Hypatia
Antiphon
Diocles

Read More: 

Benefits of Online Educational Games for Students & Kids
Unbelievable Interesting Science Facts for Students

 
     Popup 

   



× 
Want to read full blog
  

      
  

  
  Send OTP  

  
  Resend Verify  


 Select CourseJEENEETFOUNDATION 
 Select Class6th7th8th9th10th11th12th12th Pass 



 By submitting up. I agree to receive all the Whatsapp communication on my registered number and Motion terms and conditions and privacy policy


  




     
Comments comments


Tags5 indian mathematiciansall mathematicians photos with namesancient indian mathematiciansaryabhatta indian mathematicianaryabhatta mathematicianbest mathematician in indiabest mathematician in the worldbhaskara mathematicianbhaskaracharya mathematicianbrahmagupta mathematiciancontribution of indian mathematicianfamous indian mathematiciansfamous indian mathematicians with pictures and namesfamous mathematiciansfemale mathematicians of indiagreat mathematician ramanujangreat mathematiciansgreat mathematicians of indiagreat mathematicians of worldindian mathematicianindian mathematician and their contributionindian mathematician biographyindian mathematician nameslist of indian mathematiciansmahavira mathematicianmathematicianmathematician informationmathematician namesmathematicians biographymathematicians listneena gupta mathematicianramanujan mathematicianshakuntala devi mathematiciansrinivasa ramanujan mathematicianthe great mathematiciantop 10 indian mathematiciantop 10 mathematicians






Share on Facebook





Share on Twitter





Share on Google+





Share on Reddit





Share on Pinterest





Share on Linkedin





Share on Tumblr







Previous article NEET 2024 Application Form: Registration Link, Last Date to Apply 

Next article IOQJS/IOQM 2023-24 Exams Answer Key & Solutions 








Himanshu Goyal


			I am a professional Digital Marketer, Social Media Marketer & Search Engine Marketer having good knowledge of Facebook Ads Manager, Google Ads Manager, On-Page SEO, Paid Tools Like SEMRush, keyword research, Blogging, Social Media Campaign Planning, WordPress websites, and much more.

I consider myself a passionate and creative online advertiser with 12+ Years of working experience in the relevant field.		






 

























Related Articles



		                More By Himanshu Goyal	                



                        More In LATEST ARTICLE                    





 






            Load More Related Articles










 


JEE Advanced Result 2024, Toppers Rank List, Scorecard, Cutoff, Counselling IIT Madras will declare the JEE Advanced 2024 result on JEE Advanced official website- htt… 


2 days ago 
 34 min read








 


NTA NEET Result 2024 Live: NEET 2024 Toppers List – AIR 1 Topper Name, Rank, Marks The National Testing Agency will publish the NEET 2024 results on its official website (id… 


1 week ago 
 39 min read








 


JEE Main Previous Year Question Paper with Solution (Available) – Download Free JEE Main PYQ PDF The inception of the Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) Main can be traced back to the year … 


1 week ago 
 53 min read




 






            Load More By Himanshu Goyal	        










 


NEET 2024 NTA Scam Exposed! Live Updates on Re-exam, Paper Leak, Unfair Grace Marks, Supreme Court Case & Irregularities (NEET Result Scam) Is NEET 2024 Result a Scam? NEET 2024 Result Scam: The NEET 2024 results have caused contr… 


20 hours ago 
 17 min read








 


JEE Advanced Result 2024, Toppers Rank List, Scorecard, Cutoff, Counselling IIT Madras will declare the JEE Advanced 2024 result on JEE Advanced official website- htt… 


2 days ago 
 34 min read








 


NTA NEET Result 2024 Live: NEET 2024 Toppers List – AIR 1 Topper Name, Rank, Marks The National Testing Agency will publish the NEET 2024 results on its official website (id… 


1 week ago 
 39 min read




 






            Load More In LATEST ARTICLE	        








Click To Comment 
Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name  * 
Email * 
Website
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

 


Check Also





JEE Advanced Result 2024, Toppers Rank List, Scorecard, Cutoff, Counselling
IIT Madras will declare the JEE Advanced 2024 result on JEE Advanced official website- htt…











Apply Now

Your Name:








Your Email: 


 Your Mobile No.: 





 OTP





Your Course: 


 Select Course 
JEE
NEET
FOUNDATION



Your Class: 


 Select Class 









 



Latest







 



NEET 2024 NTA Scam Exposed! Live Updates on Re-exam, Paper Leak, Unfair Grace Marks, Supreme Court Case & Irregularities (NEET Result Scam)



admin 
20 hours ago








 



JEE Advanced Result 2024, Toppers Rank List, Scorecard, Cutoff, Counselling



Himanshu Goyal 
2 days ago








 



NTA NEET Result 2024 Live: NEET 2024 Toppers List – AIR 1 Topper Name, Rank, Marks



Himanshu Goyal 
1 week ago








 



List of Top 10 Best Coaching Institute For NEET in Kota (2024 Updated List)



admin 
1 week ago










JEE Advanced Result 2024


JEE Main 2024 Session 2 Result


Amrit


MOTION OPEN SCHOLARSHIP TEST (MOST)



Motivational & Inspirational Video to students By NV Sir


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WBe5ZdMZ-GE&t=3481s

Follow Me







 

 








About US


	Motion- Fastest growing coaching institute in Kota for JEE Main, JEE Advanced, NEET, AIIMS, NTSE, KVPY and Olympiad.

	

	Motion intends to fill the supply side gap in education sector by providing a platform for budding edupreneurs to unleash their innovative skills while remaining committed to the cause of development of human potential.
	

Follow Me







 

 

Popular Posts







 



NEET 2024 NTA Scam Exposed! Live Updates on Re-exam, Paper Leak, Unfair Grace Marks, Supreme Court Case & Irregularities (NEET Result Scam)



admin 
20 hours ago








 



JEE Advanced Result 2024, Toppers Rank List, Scorecard, Cutoff, Counselling



Himanshu Goyal 
2 days ago








 



NTA NEET Result 2024 Live: NEET 2024 Toppers List – AIR 1 Topper Name, Rank, Marks



Himanshu Goyal 
1 week ago










 


Timeline




20 hours ago NEET 2024 NTA Scam Exposed! Live Updates on Re-exam, Paper Leak, Unfair Grace Marks, Supreme Court Case & Irregularities (NEET Result Scam)




2 days ago JEE Advanced Result 2024, Toppers Rank List, Scorecard, Cutoff, Counselling




1 week ago NTA NEET Result 2024 Live: NEET 2024 Toppers List – AIR 1 Topper Name, Rank, Marks




1 week ago List of Top 10 Best Coaching Institute For NEET in Kota (2024 Updated List)




 






©All Rights Reserved Powered by Motion Blog  






 


















































