



Topology: A Quick Primer







   
 Next: Observing the Effects of 
Up: Measuring the Topology of 
 Previous: Introduction
 
Topology: A Quick Primer

Physicists assume that the universe can be described as a manifold.
Mathematician characterize manifolds in terms of their geometry and
topology. Geometry is a local quantity that measures the intrinsic curvature
of a surface. General relativity relates the mass distribution of the
universe to its geometry and of course, the geometry of the universe
determines the dynamics of the mass. Topology is a global quantity that
characterizes the shape of space (see, e.g., Weeks 1985 for a general
introduction). General relativity does not at all constrain the topology of
the universe.

The relationship between topology and geometry is most familiar in flat
space. Cosmologists often consider flat infinite universes: a model that
mathematicians denote as , which symbolizes a space that is a the
product of the three orthogonal real lines. A familiar cosmological model
that has the same geometry as  but a different topology is the three
torus or what mathematician call  Most cosmological simulations are
run on a three torus: if a particle tries to leave the computational
cube through one side it emerges on the opposite side.

There are several different ways of thinking about the topology of a
manifold. It is simplest to begin by considering topology in flat two
dimensional space. One example of a flat topology is a
square with identified sides. This square is the fundamental domain
of the topology. Another way of thinking about this topology is to
glue the sides
together to create a donut, a two dimensional surface embedded in a three
dimensional space. Yet another way of thinking about this topology is
to tile an
infinite plane with identical copies of the same fundamental domain.

Cosmologists generally consider three possible geometries for the universe:
a positively curved universe, a flat universe, and a negatively curved
universe. In standard parlance, closed, critical and open universes. This
later nomenclature is misleading: negatively curved universes can be either
infinite in spatial extent or compact. Both models have the same dynamics
and expand forever: dynamics is determined by geometry. The three-sphere is
a space of constant positive curvature, and the pseudosphere is a hyperbolic
space with constant negative curvature.

From a topological point of view, negatively curved (hyperbolic)
universes are ``generic'': most three dimensional manifolds can be viewed as
homogenous negatively curved and compact (Thurston's geometrization
conjecture [Thurston 1978]). Cornish, Gibbons and Weeks (1997) have
recently shown that in the Hartle-Hawking approach to quantum cosmology, the
smallest volume manifolds are favored. These smallest volume manifolds are
the simplest (least complex) compact models.

In negatively curved manifolds, the characteristic length is the curvature
scale. Thus, throughout the rest of this talk, we will use it as our unit
of length. There are an infinite number of distinct compact hyperbolic
topologies. There is a fundamental group, usually denoted  ,
associated with each of these topologies. Each of these topologies also has
a specific volume (measured in curvature units). We strongly recommend the
publicly available SNAPPEA program (http://www.geom.umn.edu/) for anyone
interested in developing a more intuitive feel for the rich structure of
compact hyperbolic topology.

One of the intriguing mathematical properties of compact hyperbolic
manifolds is that geodesic flows on these manifolds are maximally
chaotic and mixing. Because of this property they are extensively studied by
physicists and mathematicians interested in quantum chaos(Balazs & Voros 1986;
Gutzweiler 1985). We
have speculated that quantum chaos plays an important role in the
homogenization of the early universe (Cornish, Spergel & Starkman 1996a).

   
 Next: Observing the Effects of 
Up: Measuring the Topology of 
 Previous: Introduction

David Spergel 
Tue Jul 28 16:22:57 EDT 1998



