







Understanding Isaac Newton’s Law, His Life and His Legacy






























































Access free live classes and tests on the app



Download

+








Goals

AFCAT
AP EAMCET
Bank Exam
BPSC
CA Foundation
CAPF
CAT
CBSE Class 11
CBSE Class 12
CDS
CLAT
CSIR UGC
GATE
IIT JAM
JEE
Karnataka CET
Karnataka PSC
Kerala PSC
MHT CET
MPPSC
NDA
NEET PG
NEET UG
NTA UGC
Railway Exam
SSC
TS EAMCET
UPSC
WBPSC
CFA


















Search for:










Login
Join for Free





Profile
 Settings
Refer your friends
Sign out


Terms & conditions
•
Privacy policy
About
•
Careers
•
Blog








© 2023 Sorting Hat Technologies Pvt Ltd













About UPSC





Introduction to the CSE




Prelims Syllabus




Mains Syllabus





Essay Paper




GS Paper 1




GS Paper 2




GS Paper 3




GS Paper 4






Interview




Syllabus




Annual Calender




UPSC Booklists




Cut-Offs







Downloads





PYQs





Prelims




Mains




Previous Year paper analysis Analysis - Mains






Free Content





Free Content: Prelims : GS, CSAT




MCQs




Daily News Analysis: Date-wise




Important Schemes




IAS English Content




UPSC Unstoppable content









Free Video Lecture





Free Special Classes




YouTube Classes





UPSC Unstoppables




Unacademy IAS: English




Let's Crack UPSC CSE




Let's Crack UPSC CSE Hindi




World Affairs by Unacademy









Strategy





GS Mains







Courses





Foundation Courses




 Foundation Program (Hinglish)




Online Classroom Program (English)




NCERT Foundation Batch (Hindi)




Comprehensive Current Affairs Batch






Distance Learning Program





Prelims Test Series and Printed Notes (English)




Prelims Test Series and Digital Notes (English)




Mains Test Series and Printed Notes (English)




Mains Test Series and Digital Notes (English)




Mains Test Series and Printed Notes (Hindi)






Current Affairs





Daily Current Affairs









Test Series





Prelims




Mains







Scholarship





UCSC







Topper's Guide





Topper's Notes




Topper's Mock Inteview Videos





2022 Topper's




2021 Topper's






Learn from Topper's




 







UPSC » UPSC CSE Study Materials » General Awareness » Understanding Isaac Newton’s Law, His Life and His Legacy



Understanding  Isaac Newton’s Law, His Life and His Legacy			


 Share
















Isaac Newton was born at Woolsthorpe, Lincolnshire in England, on December 25, 1642, and died in London on March 20, 1727. He was an English physicist and mathematician who was the pinnacle of the Scientific Revolution in Europe. Although Isaac Newton is known for his contributions to optics and mathematics, his biggest contribution remains to formulate the three laws of motion, which are the cornerstones of modern physics.He was a member of the English Parliament for Cambridge University from 1689 to 1701. Isaac Newton’s LawIsaac Newton established a new concept of science by principle. He developed his three principles to explain why the planets’ orbits are ellipses rather than circles, which he succeeded in doing, but it turned out that he presented a lot more.Issac Newton’s law turned out to be the guiding idea for understanding any motion in general in physics. Isaac Newton’s laws are divided into three categories.Isaac Newton’s first lawIsaac Newton’s first law asserts that if a body is at rest or moving in a straight path at a constant speed, it will remain at rest or continue to move in a straight line at a constant speed until acted upon by force.The second law of Isaac NewtonThe second law of Isaac Newton is a quantitative description of a force’s effects on a body’s motion. It asserts that the force imposed on a body equals the time rate of change of its momentum in both magnitude and direction.The third law of Isaac NewtonWhen two bodies contact, Isaac Newton’s third law states that they apply forces to each other that are equal in magnitude and opposing in direction. The law of action and reaction is another name for the third law.Isaac Newton InventionsIsaac Newton’s inventions make quite a big list. The details of which are as follows.Gravity: It is Isaac Newton’s most notable discovery, and this gravitational force theory helped explain how the planets and the Sun move.Calculus: He created an entirely new branch of mathematics. These new mathematics was given the term ‘fluxions’ by him. It is currently known as calculus. Advanced engineering and science employ this form of mathematics.Reflecting Telescope: In 1668, Isaac Newton devised the reflecting telescope. Mirrors reflect light and create a picture in this telescope. In the discipline of astronomy, these reflecting telescopes are utilised.Laws of Motion: He introduced three fundamental physics laws, laying the foundation of classical mechanics. Those three laws are: the – Law of Inertia, Laws of Action and Reaction, and the third law states that acceleration is proportional to force.Scientific Reasoning RulesHe defined scientific methodology as a set of four norms for reasoning in science. Isaac Newton created the universal law of nature by applying these four universal rules.The Rings of Isaac Newton:Isaac Newton noticed an interference pattern created by light reflection between two surfaces, a spherical and a flat surface, in 1717. Isaac Newton’s Rings are the name for this circular design.Isaac Newton Biography Isaac Newton was born at Wools Thorpe, Lincolnshire, England, on December 25, 1643, and died in London on March 20, 1727. His maternal grandmother raised Isaac Newton after his mother’s second marriage. Throughout his life, Isaac Newton made substantial contributions to science. He is credited with inventing calculus and establishing a comprehensive understanding of optics. But it was his work on forces that he was most famous for, particularly the establishment of a universal law of gravitation and his laws of motion. Isaac Newton devoted himself to his work as an adult. He had no hobbies and never married. When he was around 80 years old, Newton started having trouble with digestion and had to start watching what he ate. Isaac Newton blacked out in March 1727 after suffering from acute abdominal discomfort, and he died the next day on the 31st of March in1727. Isaac Newton was raised in an extended household that included his mother, grandmother, one half-brother, and two half-sisters after his stepfather died in 1653. Isaac started attending Grantham’s Free Grammar School shortly after this.ConclusionIsaac Newton’s first rule of motion reflecting telescope was one of the legendary scientist Isaac Newton’s many creations. Scientific Reasoning Principles Isaac Newton was a talented scientist who dedicated his life to the pursuit of knowledge. He never married and spent his entire life working to further science. Isaac Newton’s scientific contributions have made the world’s issues much easier to solve today. Science has never forgotten Isaac Newton, who was and always will be one of his century’s top scientists. Isaac Newton’s inventions will continue to remind us of him and benefit the scientific world for the rest of the world and will always be remembered by science lovers all over the world in golden words. 























 



Frequently asked questions




Get answers to the most common queries related to the UPSC Examination Preparation.




















What has been Isaac Newton's contribution to the world?

Answer- During his lifetime, Isaac Newton made a substantial contribution to s...Read full



 What impact did Isaac Newton's laws have on the world?

Answer- Isaac Newton’s theory helped establish that all objects, no matter how little or huge, are affected by...Read full



What was Isaac Isaac Newton's most significant contribution?

Answer- Although Isaac Newton is highly renowned for his discoveries in optics (white light composition) and mathema...Read full



What are some of Isaac Newton's inventions?

Answer- Gravity: – It is Isaac Newton’s most notable discovery.
...Read full












Answer- During his lifetime, Isaac Newton made a substantial contribution to science. He was the creator of calculus and the first to explain optics clearly. But it was his work on forces, particularly the establishment of a universal rule of gravitation and Issac Newton’s laws of motion, that he was most famous for.



Answer- Isaac Newton’s theory helped establish that all objects, no matter how little or huge, are affected by gravity. The ebbs and flows of rivers and tides are caused by gravity, which helped maintain the planets spinning around the sun.
 



Answer- Although Isaac Newton is highly renowned for his discoveries in optics (white light composition) and mathematics (calculus), he is best remembered for formulating the three laws of motion, which are the fundamental principles of contemporary physics.



Answer- Gravity: – It is Isaac Newton’s most notable discovery.
Calculus: – He created an entirely new branch of mathematics.
Reflecting Telescope: – In 1668, Isaac Newton devised the reflecting telescope.































Unacademy is India’s largest online learning platform. Download our apps to start learning




































































Starting your preparation?
Call us and we will answer all your questions about learning on Unacademy





Call +91 8585858585





Company
About usShikshodayaCareers
we're hiring
BlogsPrivacy PolicyTerms and Conditions



Help &
							support
User
							GuidelinesSite MapRefund PolicyTakedown PolicyGrievance Redressal


Products
						
Learner appEducator appParent app


Popular goals
IIT JEEUPSCSSCCSIR
							UGC NETNEET UG



Trending exams
GATECATCANTA UGC NETBank Exams


Study material
UPSC
							Study MaterialNEET UG Study MaterialCA Foundation Study MaterialJEE Study MaterialSSC Study Material





© 2024 Sorting Hat Technologies Pvt Ltd





























 





Goals

AFCAT
AP EAMCET
Bank Exam
BPSC
CA Foundation
CAPF
CAT
CBSE Class 11
CBSE Class 12
CDS
CLAT
CSIR UGC
GATE
IIT JAM
JEE
Karnataka CET
Karnataka PSC
Kerala PSC
MHT CET
MPPSC
NDA
NEET PG
NEET UG
NTA UGC
Railway Exam
SSC
TS EAMCET
UPSC
WBPSC
CFA















Share via










COPY
							











































