















What is the history of number pi?



























 LanguagesPortugueseEnglish   Home

 Contact







Toggle navigation

















                                Worksheet
                            

 Grade 4
 Grade 5
 Grade 6
 Grade 7




                                Cheatsheet
                            

 Platonic Solid
 Triangle Classification
 Polygon Classification
 Important Points of Triangles
 Function Transformations
 Statistical Graphs
 Angle Names
 Angle Relationships
 Angles in Circles
 Types of Matrices
 Line and Plane Relationships




                                Calculator
                            

 Scientific Calculator
 Percentage Calculator
 BMI Calculator
 VAT Calculator
 Quadratic Equation Calculator
 Convert Units




                                Useful
                            

 FAQ
 Math Formulas
 Math Symbols
 Kangaroo Questions
 TED Conferences
 Famous Curves
 Free Software
 Study Tips
 ASCII Table




                                Geometry
                            







Angles
 Complementary Angles
 Supplementary Angles
 Inscribed Angle
 Inscribed Angle on Diameter

Points and Lines
 Midpoint of a Line Segment
 Slope of a Line
 Slope Formula
 Distance Between Points




Functions
 Function Transformations
 Isometries: Reflection
 Isometries: Rotation
 Quadratic Functions

Trigonometry
 Radian Measure
 Unit Circle
 Graph Sine Function
 Graph Cosine Function
 Graph Tangent Function




Equations
 System of Linear Equation
 Circle Equation

Vectors
 Vector Addition
 Vector Equation of a Line




Statistics
 Box Plot
 Find Mean
 Find Median
 Find Mode

Complex
 Complex Numbers










                                Fun
                            

 Sudoku
 Tic-Tac-Toe
 Magic Symbols
 Tower of Hanoi
 Numbers Curiosities
 Einstein's Riddle
 Palindrome
 Jokes












Search























What is the history of number pi?
short answers for big questions


The history concerning the emergence of pi goes back to the ancient Egypt, that is, to more than 4000 years ago. However, at that time it did not have the name of the Greek letter made it famous. Some of the ancient papyrus show that Egyptians gave pi the value of `3.16`.
But, after all, what is pi?
Starting with a simple explanation, it is just a number. It is represented by the Greek letter `pi` and it is used to designate the ratio between the length of a circumference and its diameter. This value is always the same no matter the size of the circumference!

How did pi develop?
Pi has a long history. There were several ancient civilizations that tried to find the most approached value of pi. As we have said before, the Egyptians managed the closest value of `3.16`. Almost at the same time, the Babylonians got the most approached estimated value of `3.125`. By the 3rd century B.C the great Greek mathematician Archimedes started by calculating the perimeter of two hexagons, being one of them inscribed and the other circumscribed in the circumference. When he increased the number of sides of the polygon till he reached 96 sides, he managed an approach concerning the value of Pi that corresponded to `3.142`. Then, making use of the same technique, and through a polygon of 720 sides, Ptolomeu managed an estimate of `3.1416`. Later, by the 5th century, by making use of a polygon with 3072 sides, the chinese managed an estimate of `3.14159`. So, the estimates were improved throughout the years. We have to stress that all these calculations were made by hand. For instance, in the 16th century, the Dutch Ludolph Van Ceulen managed the value of Pi with 35 elements. At that time, these kinds of calculations meant years and years of hard work! More recently, through the use of computers; it has been possible to calculate the value of pi having millions of decimal elements.

Well, and its symbol, when did it appear?
Many of the mathematical symbols used nowadays are due to the great Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler. It was him who, in 1737, gave birth to the symbol `pi` in order to represent the famous number. It was also at that time that mathematicians showed that pi is an irrational number and so the number of decimal elements necessary to obtain its accurate value is infinite.




Check out our List of Questions to get to know a little more about the most diverse topics related to mathematics. If you have any pertinent (math) question whose answer can not easily be found, send us an email on the Contact page with the question. We will be happy to respond. In the event that you detect any errors in our answers, do not hesitate to contact us!





















MATEMATICA.PT © 2024 - Vitor NunesSe eliminar a causa, o efeito cessa.


						 					















×
 Receber Novidades




Subscreve a nossa newsletter para estar informado sobre as mais recentes novidades!




Subscrever






Fechar










 