





What Are Complex Numbers? | Live Science





































 
































































 






  






 







Skip to main content







Open menu
Close menu



Live Science 
Live Science 




Search

 


Search Live Science



 



Subscribe



RSS




 

 

 

 

 





How It Works MagazineWhy subscribe?The ultimate action-packed science and technology magazine bursting with exciting information about the universeSubscribe today and save an extra 5% with checkout code 'LOVE5'Engaging articles, amazing illustrations & exclusive interviewsIssues delivered straight to your door or device From$26.49View Deal












Space




Health




Planet Earth




Animals




Archaeology




Physics & Math




Human Behavior




Technology




Chemistry



More



Science news


About Us


Newsletter


Story archive





 


 


Trending'Walking' treeJWST's carbon discoveryHaunting shipwrecksNeanderthal interbreedingBest star projectors

When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.













Physics & Mathematics


Mathematics



What Are Complex Numbers?


References
By Elaine J. Hom published 30 January 2014 






 



 



 








 



 



























In this complex number, 3 is the real number and 5i is the imaginary number.









Complex numbers are numbers that consist of two parts — a real number and an imaginary number. Complex numbers are the building blocks of more intricate math, such as algebra. They can be applied to many aspects of real life, especially in electronics and electromagnetism.The standard format for complex numbers is a + bi, with the real number first and the imaginary number last. Because either part could be 0, technically any real number or imaginary number can be considered a complex number. Complex does not mean complicated; it means that the two types of numbers combine to form a complex, like a housing complex — a group of buildings joined together.Real numbers are tangible values that can be plotted on a horizontal number line, such as fractions, integers or any countable number that you can think of. Imaginary numbers are abstract concepts that are used when you need the square root of a negative number. Adding & multiplying complex numbersBecause a complex number is a binomial — a numerical expression with two terms — arithmetic is generally done in the same way as any binomial, by combining the like terms and simplifying. For example:(3 + 2i) + (4 - 4i)(3 + 4) = 7(2i - 4i) = -2iThe result is 7-2i.For multiplication, you employ the FOIL method for polynomial multiplication: multiply the First, multiply the Outer, multiply the Inner, multiply the Last, and then add. For example:(3 - 2i)(5 + 3i) =(3)(5) + (3)(3i) + (-2i)(5) + (-2i)(3i) =15 + 9i + -10i + -6i2 =15 - i - 6(-1) =21 - iThe reason that i2 simplifies to (-1) is because i is the square root of -1. Dividing complex numbersDivision, however, becomes more complicated and requires using conjugates. Complex conjugates are pairs of complex numbers that have different signs, such as (a + bi) and (a - bi). Multiplying complex conjugates causes the middle term to cancel out. For example:(a + bi)(a - bi) = a2 - abi + abi - (bi)2This simplifies to a2 - b2(i2) = a2 - b2(-1)The final result is a2 + b2When dividing complex numbers, determine the conjugate of the denominator and multiply the numerator and denominator by the conjugate. For example,(5 + 2i) ÷ (7 + 4i)The conjugate of 7 + 4i is 7 - 4i. So, multiply the numerator and denominator by the conjugate:(5 + 2i)(7 – 4i) ÷ (7 + 4i)(7 - 4i) =(35 + 14i – 20i – 8i2) ÷ (49 - 28i + 28i – 16i2 ) =(35 - 6i + 8) ÷ (49 + 16) =(43 - 6i) ÷ 65 Absolute value of complex numbersThe absolute value of a number is considered its distance from zero on the number line. Because complex numbers include imaginary numbers, they cannot be plotted on the real number line. However, they can be measured from zero on the complex number plane, which includes an x axis (for the real number) and the y axis (for the imaginary number). Uses of complex numbersComplex numbers can be used to solve quadratics for zeroes. The quadratic formula solves ax2 + bx + c = 0 for the values of x. If the formula provides a negative in the square root, complex numbers can be used to simplify the zero.Complex numbers are used in electronics and electromagnetism. A single complex number puts together two real quantities, making the numbers easier to work with. For example, in electronics, the state of a circuit element is defined by the voltage (V) and the current (I). Circuit elements can also have a capacitance (c) and inductance (L) that describes the circuit's tendency to resist changes in V and I. Rather than describing the circuit element's state by V and I, it can be described as z = V + Ii. The laws of electricity can then be expressed using the addition and multiplication of complex umbers.As mentioned before, this can also be applied to electromagnetism. Instead of being described as electric field strength and magnetic field strength, you can create a complex number where the electric and magnetic components are the real and imaginary numbers. Further reading:Complex number calculatorMath is Fun: Complex NumbersMath Warehouse: Complex Numbers

Sign up for the Live Science daily newsletter nowGet the world’s most fascinating discoveries delivered straight to your inbox.Contact me with news and offers from other Future brandsReceive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsorsBy submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over.
Elaine J. HomSocial Links NavigationLive Science Contributor
More about mathematicsAvi Wigderson wins $1 million Turing Award for using randomness to change computer sciencePi calculated to 105 trillion digits, smashing world recordLatestWhat's the difference between a rock and a mineral?See more latest ►







Most PopularWhy is it called 'morning sickness' if it can happen any time of day?Why is snot sticky?What causes bruising?Why do wrinkles form?Do ears and noses get bigger with age?Why do lips get so chapped in winter?Can drinking alcohol really cause hiccups?Why is it safe to eat moldy cheese?What is frankincense?Why is pink eye so contagious?Can you really be allergic to the sun?



























MOST READMOST SHARED1100-foot 'walking tree' in New Zealand looks like an Ent from Lord of the Rings — and is the lone survivor of a lost forest2Space photo of the week: James Webb and Chandra telescopes spot a 'lighthouse' pointed at Earth31st Neuralink user describes highs and lows of living with Elon Musk's brain chip4Rare fungal STI spotted in US for the 1st time5James Webb telescope finds carbon at the dawn of the universe, challenging our understanding of when life could have emerged11st Neuralink user describes highs and lows of living with Elon Musk's brain chip2Bornean clouded leopard family filmed in wild for 1st time ever37 potential 'alien megastructures' spotted in our galaxy are not what they seem4What is the 3-body problem, and is it really unsolvable?













Live Science is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site.


About Us
Contact Future's experts
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies policy
Accessibility Statement
Advertise with us
Web notifications
Careers
Editorial standards
How to pitch a story to us


©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. 


 

















 
