



When did the use of complex numbers become widespread in physics? - History of Science and Mathematics Stack Exchange






































 


Skip to main content










Stack Exchange Network

						Stack Exchange network consists of 183 Q&A communities including Stack Overflow, the largest, most trusted online community for developers to learn, share their knowledge, and build their careers.
					
Visit Stack Exchange












Loading…



















                                Tour
                                
                                    Start here for a quick overview of the site
                                




                            Help Center
                            
                                Detailed answers to any questions you might have
                            




                                        Meta
                                        
                                            Discuss the workings and policies of this site
                                        




                                    About Us
                                    
                                        Learn more about Stack Overflow the company, and our products
                                    














current community
















            History of Science and Mathematics
        



help
chat









            History of Science and Mathematics Meta
        






your communities            



Sign up or log in to customize your list.                


more stack exchange communities

company blog








Log in

Sign up








History of Science and Mathematics            












 Home






 Questions






 Tags







 Users






 Unanswered






Teams



            Ask questions, find answers and collaborate at work with Stack Overflow for Teams.
        
Explore Teams
Create a free Team




Teams







            Ask questions, find answers and collaborate at work with Stack Overflow for Teams.
            Explore Teams








Teams
Q&A for work
Connect and share knowledge within a single location that is structured and easy to search.

                    Learn more about Teams
                











When did the use of complex numbers become widespread in physics?



        Ask Question
    





Asked
6 years, 4 months ago


Modified
2 years, 3 months ago


Viewed
                        2k times
                    

















            8
        












$\begingroup$

Complex number are extremely useful in every branch of physics dealing with ondulatory phenomena. In electromagnetism, for example, they allow to write the solution of Maxwell's equations in a form which is particularly simple to manipulate.
When did the use of complex numbers become widespread in physics?




physicstheoretical-physics









Share


Improve this question



                        Follow
                        










edited Jan 17, 2018 at 17:59





valerio









            asked Jan 17, 2018 at 15:05






valeriovalerio

36511 silver badge1212 bronze badges






$\endgroup$








Add a comment
 | 











                                        2 Answers
                                    2






            Sorted by:
        

            Reset to default
        




                        Highest score (default)
                    

                        Date modified (newest first)
                    

                        Date created (oldest first)
                    
















            9
        

















$\begingroup$

It depends on the definition of "widespread". Mathematicians certainly used them in 18th century. They play prominent role in the work of Cauchy and Fourier (which belongs to both physics and mathematics). Probably they entered physics with the work of Fresnel on the wave theory of light (1823). Maxwell uses them in his Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (1873). The standard textbook on mathematical physics of the late 19th century (Kelvin and Tait) freely uses them.
Remark. When searching the last mentioned book use the word "imaginary", not "complex". I found this word used many times without any special
explanation: the use of complex numbers by that time was routine. Another English word used early in 19th century was "impossible". J. B. Airy talks about "impossible roots" meaning "complex roots".
Second remark (to address the issue raised in comments). The engineers started using complex numbers since the criteria of stability were discovered. (It is due to Maxwell (1868) that for stability of a linear system the roots of the characteristic polynomial must lie in the left half-plane.) Since then, all engineers designing steam engines use complex numbers. Maxwell was not the first to address stability in engineering from the mathematical point of view, but he gave the first general criterion. The first was J. B. Airy, an astronomer (1840). And any criterion of stability uses complex numbers. The names of 19 century engineers working on stability are still mentioned in the complex variables textbooks (Stodola, Vyshnegradski).
Edit. I was right when I mentioned Fresnel first of all.
Here is a paper which describes the first essential instance when complex numbers appeared in physics:

Ricardo Karam, Fresnel's original interpretation of complex numbers in 19th century optics,
American Journal of Physics 86, 245 (2018).

By a correct interpretation of a complex amplitude, Fresnel discovered the phase shift of light after an internal reflection.








Share


Improve this answer



                        Follow
                        










edited Feb 23, 2022 at 4:17














            answered Jan 17, 2018 at 18:05






Alexandre EremenkoAlexandre Eremenko

49.6k33 gold badges8080 silver badges179179 bronze badges






$\endgroup$

5






1




$\begingroup$
Following your last sentence about Kelvin and Tait, Charles Proteus Steinmetz (1865–1923) should probably be mentioned as being primarily responsible (1900s and 1910s) for their introduction into electrical engineering, and thus into more mainstream use. In "popular literature" (magazine articles, non-technical scientific books, etc.), I suspect they fully entered the public's eye with all the 1920s popularizations of relativity theory (and popularizations of quantum mechanics in the 1930s).
$\endgroup$

– Dave L Renfro

Jan 17, 2018 at 18:30










$\begingroup$
I think you're mistaken about Kelvin and Tait. I searched pretty thoroughly through both volumes archive.org/details/treatiseonnatura01kelv_0 archive.org/details/treatiseonnatura02kelv_0 and found no mention of complex or imaginary numbers, except in one spot in Appendix G, where it appears that imaginary roots of a polynomial are only mentioned as being physically irrelevant. "Complex," "imaginary," and "quaternion" are all absent from the index. If complex numbers were going to show up, you would think they would show up in the treatment of Fourier analysis, but they don't.
$\endgroup$

– user466

Jan 17, 2018 at 21:09









5




$\begingroup$
@Ben Crowel: They were not called "complex" at that time. Use your computer search engine for the word "imaginary", or see formula (45), section 345 of the first volume. They use then routinely, without feeling a need for special explanation or inclusion into index.
$\endgroup$

– Alexandre Eremenko

Jan 18, 2018 at 0:37






3




$\begingroup$
@AlexandreEremenko: I was sloppy and only searched for "imaginary" in the second volume. You're right, it appears much more frequently in the first volume. However, I think the main thrust of your answer is just plain historically wrong. Physicists and engineers in general were not  commonly using vectors, complex numbers, or quaternions until about 1920-1940, as discussed in my answer. A good reference on this topic is Crowe, A history of vector analysis.
$\endgroup$

– user466

Jan 18, 2018 at 15:52













$\begingroup$
@Ben Crowel;: I do not want to argue with you, but I edited my answer, adding information about engineers. The original question was about physicists. Vectors are much later "invention" than complex numbers.
$\endgroup$

– Alexandre Eremenko

Jan 18, 2018 at 21:43









Add a comment
 | 



















            11
        

















$\begingroup$

Roughly speaking, complex numbers seem to have become widely used in physics and engineering around 1940, after gradually gaining popularity starting around 1920.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, there were three algebraic systems of numbers competing for attention: complex numbers, quaternions, and vectors. Vectors were late to the party. Maxwell used quaternions (1873), and they were enthusiastically promoted by their adherents, especially Hamilton, for purposes that today we would use vectors for. Quaternions can be viewed as a generalization of both vectors and complex numbers. Most physicists considered quaternions to be very abstruse. As late as 1905, Einstein's paper on special relativity states Maxwell's equations without the use of either vector or quaternion notation. The 1895 edition of Kelvin and Tait's massive  Treatise on Natural Philosophy has no index entries for "complex," "imaginary," "vector," or "quaternion," and complex numbers are used only infrequently. Tait wrote an 1890 book on quaternions, so it's not as though he didn't know about them. They just weren't the kind of thing that readers could be expected to know about.
Gibbs and Heaviside created the vector system as an easier alternative to quaternions, and it gradually gained popularity. Gibbs described it in an 1881 book, which he promoted vigorously and successfully.
Kennelly introduced the notion of a complex impedance in 1893, and this was recognized as a big selling point of the use of complex numbers. A popular 1941 textbook by Stratton, Electromagnetic Theory, used complex numbers. So I think the widespread use of complex numbers in physics and engineering must date to approximately 1900-1940. To pin this down a little more, I think it's helpful to look at the google ngrams graphs for "complex impedance" and "complex exponential," which both show nonnegligible usage starting around 1920, and an inflection point around 1940.








Share


Improve this answer



                        Follow
                        










edited Jan 18, 2018 at 15:43














            answered Jan 17, 2018 at 22:34






        user466user466







$\endgroup$

1










$\begingroup$
Maxwell used vectors everywhere in his treatise, he just didn't use modern notation. Gibbs and Heaviside only standardized vector notation, not vectors. For clarification, see the Preliminary chapter of the treatise e.g. here: aproged.pt/biblioteca/MaxwellI.pdf
$\endgroup$

– Sam Gallagher

Mar 1, 2022 at 13:49






Add a comment
 | 











                                    Your Answer
                                















Thanks for contributing an answer to History of Science and Mathematics Stack Exchange!Please be sure to answer the question. Provide details and share your research!But avoid …Asking for help, clarification, or responding to other answers.Making statements based on opinion; back them up with references or personal experience.Use MathJax to format equations. MathJax reference.To learn more, see our tips on writing great answers.






Draft saved
Draft discarded












Sign up or log in


 Sign up using Google
                        

 Sign up using Facebook
                            

 Sign up using Email and Password
                        



Submit

Post as a guest


Name









Email
Required, but never shown












Post as a guest


Name









Email
Required, but never shown











                                            Post Your Answer
                                        

                                            Discard
                                        

                                                By clicking “Post Your Answer”, you agree to our terms of service and acknowledge you have read our privacy policy.






Not the answer you're looking for? Browse other questions tagged physicstheoretical-physics or ask your own question.                                









Related



45

When exactly (and why) did matrices become a part of the undergraduate curriculum?



4

When in the history of physics did 'laws of nature' become the primary form of explanation?



25

When and why did the concept of relativistic mass become outdated?



5

When did error propagation become prominent in physics?



3

When did statistics become an integral part of physics?



5

How were negative numbers first used in physics?



6

When did the use of Sine and Cosine as functions become mainstream?



5

What did Quine say on paradox and physics?







            Hot Network Questions
        




                    Is there a phrase like "etymologically related" but for food?
                



                    For the square wave signal, why does a narrower square wave correspond to more spread in the frequency domain?
                



                    Brake Line no Longer Connected to Brake Lever
                



                    P values non-significant but Monte Carlo confidence interval does not contain zero for indirect effects
                



                    Executable files with a bytecode compiler/interpreter
                



                    Smallest Harmonic number greater than N
                



                    Starlink Satellite Orbits
                



                    what does the word of seven book- length means
                



                    Why Did The Drywall Tape Fail in My Garage? And How Can I Fix It?
                



                    Are professional cameras better when it comes to knowing how others see you?
                



                    Non-universal and non classically simulatable gate set?
                



                    Why is array access not an infix operator?
                



                    Is a Poisson minus a constant still a Poisson?
                



                    Why is finding a mathematical basis for the fine-structure constant meaningful?
                



                    can you roll your own .iso for USB stick?
                



                    Cut out rotated rectangle shape
                



                    TikZ - how to draw ticks on circle perpendicularly with ellipses around?
                



                    How do Authenticators work?
                



                    Yosemite national park availability
                



                    Why are we abbreviating Player's Handbook to PHB?
                



                    Should I ask for authorship or ignore?
                



                    Is a doctor's diagnosis in clinical notes, made without a confirmatory test, admissible evidence in an assault case in California?
                



                    Is there a matrix with rational entries similar to a given matrix?
                



                    Is this deck post getting cracks due to overloaded?
                



            more hot questions
        




            Question feed
        




                Subscribe to RSS
            



                        Question feed
                        To subscribe to this RSS feed, copy and paste this URL into your RSS reader.
























History of Science and Mathematics

Tour
Help
Chat
Contact
Feedback



Company

Stack Overflow
Teams
Advertising
Collectives
Talent
About
Press
Legal
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Cookie Settings
Cookie Policy




Stack Exchange Network



                                    Technology
                                



                                    Culture & recreation
                                



                                    Life & arts
                                



                                    Science
                                



                                    Professional
                                



                                    Business
                                



                                    API
                                



                                    Data
                                







Blog
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Instagram


Site design / logo © 2024 Stack Exchange Inc; user contributions licensed under CC BY-SA.                    rev 2024.6.11.10735












